[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Before you listen to this episode of the scene in the unseen I have a recommendation for you
[Amit Varma]: Do check out pulya bazi hosted by Saurabh Chandra and Pranay Koteswane two really good friends of mine
[Amit Varma]: Kick-ass podcast in Hindi. It's amazing
[Amit Varma]: One of the themes of the last few episodes of the scene in the unseen is how hindsight makes the past seem inevitable
[Amit Varma]: It isn't always like that
[Amit Varma]: Sitting here in 2019. It's obvious that the Narendra Modi government has failed at so many different levels
[Amit Varma]: But back in 2014
[Amit Varma]: There were many who were hopeful that this government would make important reforms and take the country forward
[Amit Varma]: Among those who felt this hope in fact was a guest of my episode today
[Amit Varma]: Who was then and is now a spokesperson for the Congress Party the BJP's manifesto in 2014 had much that was welcome
[Amit Varma]: And some of those seems in fact have carried forward to the Congress manifesto of 2019
[Amit Varma]: unfortunately for India much of that was just words
[Amit Varma]: Modi wasted a great opportunity to take our country ahead and no matter which party you support that has to count as a
[Unknown]: great disappointment
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen our weekly podcast on economics politics and behavioral science, please. Welcome your host
[Amit Varma]: Amit Varma welcome to the scene in the unseen my guest for today is a
[Amit Varma]: Economist Salman soz who is a spokesperson for the Congress Party and has just released a book called the great disappointment
[Amit Varma]: The book is about the economics of Narendra Modi's five-year term and given that it is written by a member of the opposition party
[Amit Varma]: I expected it to be a partisan hit job far from it
[Amit Varma]: Salman clearly wrote the book with his economist hat on even though he's quite forthright about where his loyalties lie
[Amit Varma]: His account in the book is surprisingly balanced and has personal touches that I found refreshing
[Amit Varma]: for example
[Amit Varma]: He writes that he liked much that was in the BJP manifesto of 2014 and that he was hopeful that Modi would fulfill some of
[Amit Varma]: His promises. In fact, his book is called the great disappointment
[Amit Varma]: Because Modi did not fulfill those promises when I wrote to Salman to invite him for the show
[Amit Varma]: I told him that I wanted to talk about more than just what was in the book many of the topics he covers like
[Amit Varma]: Demonetization and GST have already been covered in detail in the scene and the unseen over multiple episodes
[Amit Varma]: I wanted him to go beyond the economics of Modi's term and I also wanted to ask him tough questions about the Congress Party itself
[Amit Varma]: Salman's response to this request can be summed up in three words
[Amit Varma]: Ask me anything and indeed he gamely took on everything. I threw at him. He told me what the UPA did wrong
[Amit Varma]: He explained what Modi got right?
[Amit Varma]: He praised the watch by government and he even took on an awkward question about the dynastic nature of the Congress Party leadership
[Amit Varma]: Whether his answers convinced you or not is a different matter
[Amit Varma]: but I was enormously impressed at the sincerity and the
[Amit Varma]: Intellectual honesty and the fact that a leader from a major political party would open himself up to difficult questions in this manner
[Amit Varma]: Can you imagine anyone from a current BJP leadership agreeing to do this?
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to a conversation though a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by storytel
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audio books that you can listen to on your mobile including hundreds in local languages like Hindi and Marathi
[Amit Varma]: And unlimited monthly subscription costs only rupees 299 per month
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30-day free trial if you hop on over to sroydltenny.com slash IBM
[Amit Varma]: I actually use storytel myself regularly. So as long as I sponsor the show
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love the book
[Amit Varma]: I want to recommend today is by one of my heroes a 19th century French writer Frederick Barcia
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the title of this podcast is seen in the unseen comes from an essay that he wrote called that which is seen and that
[Amit Varma]: Which is not seen the book. I'm recommending though is a masterpiece
[Amit Varma]: It's called the law and it is so explanatory of the way the state works and the importance for individual freedom
[Amit Varma]: I can't recommend it highly enough do go and listen to it on storytel and remember you get a 30-day free trial
[Amit Varma]: only at storytel.com slash IBM
[Unknown]: Salman welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thank you so much. I mean, thank you for having me
[Amit Varma]: Salman I really enjoyed reading your book the great disappointment which did not live up to his title in the sense
[Amit Varma]: It wasn't a great disappointment for me
[Amit Varma]: Before we kind of get to the book tell me a little bit about you know your career as an economist and
[Guest]: all the journeys you made so far. Well, you know, I went for higher studies to the US and
[Guest]: You know realized that I enjoyed policy work and didn't really want to get into the PhD stream
[Guest]: You know going to academics and all that
[Guest]: So the World Bank was always one of those things that my father used to tell me about you talk about the World Bank
[Guest]: The IMF and GATT those days we had the GATT not the WTO
[Guest]: So he always thought of me as an international civil servant and you know, I pursued that
[Guest]: And somehow landed up at the World Bank
[Guest]: Passed around my resume quite a bit and then you know started doing in fact
[Guest]: my first assignment at the World Bank was about evaluation and the importance of results in
[Guest]: in development work and
[Guest]: After all these years now I feel that there's a lot more emphasis on
[Guest]: What the outcomes and impacts of programs are as opposed to just the inputs because we used to focus so much on inputs earlier
[Guest]: So in the World Bank, I've you know done a lot of different work. I worked on
[Guest]: Strategic issues I worked on actually I worked on natural disasters
[Guest]: And how to manage their impacts and I've actually led teams in Europe and Central Asia
[Guest]: I worked on you know forming international partnerships
[Guest]: so a lot of different stuff, but then you know eventually when I moved to India in
[Guest]: 2011 I quit the World Bank because I thought that you know, there are plenty of people with my kind of
[Guest]: Background in the US and I wanted to kind of do more work in Kashmir and in and in India
[Guest]: I thought this international exposure to policy work would probably help there
[Guest]: So, you know I took you know, in some ways I kind of took that kind of
[Guest]: Lens and went moved to India and of course the reality on the ground is very different from what you see from Washington
[Guest]: So it was very very very interesting experience, but I actually started delving more into
[Guest]: India's political economy, which I found to be very interesting. And of course India's challenges are you know immense?
[Guest]: And so, you know, I think I think that's how I can just
[Guest]: Meandered around and ultimately ended up
[Guest]: Working on India writing about the Indian economy and eventually writing this book and now you're part of the Congress and you're one of the
[Amit Varma]: spokespeople and you know one thing that sort of I wonder is you know
[Amit Varma]: Harry Truman once spoke about how he would like 100 economists because economists keep saying well on the one hand this and
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so as an economist, obviously you're trained to look at every side of an issue to
[Amit Varma]: Examine all the nuances and so on but in politics, especially I would imagine if you're the spokesman of a party
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes you have to stick to a simple narrative
[Amit Varma]: You can't do on the one hand this on the other hand that how do you reconcile those different challenges?
[Amit Varma]: Well, yeah, I think that is a significant challenge for people
[Guest]: Especially who come with you know with my background
[Guest]: But you know, I mean first I come from
[Guest]: You know a family where politics was already kind of ingrained in us. My father has been a politician for decades
[Guest]: He was a member of Parliament for many many terms and also minister. So I think I've seen it up close
[Guest]: but when you join a political party, which I did in
[Guest]: 2013 or so formally and then you're asked to represent the party and its views
[Guest]: Of course, you do get kind of taken in by the political party
[Guest]: you can just take it into this one way kind of
[Guest]: communication so to speak but I think
[Guest]: the way I dealt with this was basically stick to facts as much as possible and
[Guest]: If so, I can have focused on data
[Guest]: so my big thing was I'll try and use data to make my argument and I remember in the
[Guest]: 2014 in the run-up to the 2014 election I
[Guest]: I used to you know face a barrage of questions on the economy on inflation
[Guest]: Fiscal deficits and this thing and that thing and what I would rely on is, you know
[Guest]: UPA's growth story its poverty reduction story and of course they have a problem as well
[Guest]: But you know in development you have problems and it there's no there is no kind of clean development model. It's pretty you know
[Guest]: You have to roll up your sleeves. You have to go
[Guest]: Knee-deep into mud and it's you know, sometimes you have progress sometimes you regress, but that's what economic development is
[Guest]: so I think I kept that as my kind of
[Guest]: Compass so to speak so I would not just spew the party line
[Guest]: I would actually try to kind of back my assertions with data. So in that sense I created a space for myself
[Guest]: Which I thought was available and and that's how I did it
[Guest]: It's not easy, of course, because you know, you know and and writing this book actually, you know
[Guest]: It's not been that simple because I didn't want this to become
[Guest]: Oh, there's a Congress guy and he's written a book about Modi and against Modi. So I didn't want it to be like that
[Guest]: I've tried my best actually to be as objective as possible
[Guest]: I've given the government credit wherever I could but for the most part, you know
[Guest]: I really feel the title reflects what I see about this government even though you disagree
[Guest]: In fact others have told me that they don't agree with the title but for different reasons
[Amit Varma]: No, no
[Amit Varma]: when I I was actually kidding what I meant was that reading the book was not a disappointment for me as
[Amit Varma]: Far as Modi's term is I think calling it a disappointment is an understatement
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and and I think you're absolutely right in the sense that one of the things that surprised me when I was reading the
[Amit Varma]: book is that there are moments when you're critical of the UPA especially
[Amit Varma]: UPA too and there are moments where you give credit where credit is due to Modi and and we'll come to all of that but
[Amit Varma]: Before we sort of come to the five-year period of 2014 to 2019 which the book is about
[Amit Varma]: I'd like you to also
[Amit Varma]: Set a sort of context for me
[Amit Varma]: In terms of what has happened in the Indian economy before that and if I can ask you one broad question that sitting in 2014
[Amit Varma]: What are the broad lessons that policymakers could have taken from all those decades of governance of independence India before that?
[Guest]: Well, you know the context for the book is you know to my mind the context for the book is twofold
[Guest]: one is
[Guest]: You know on a lighter note and that is the commissioning agent at penguin had been after my life for two years
[Guest]: She'd seen my articles and newspapers and all that
[Guest]: She felt that I could write something and initially we thought we'd write about Kashmir
[Guest]: then I said no, I know the economy reasonably well and
[Guest]: Ultimately, you know and with the elections approaching
[Guest]: She said wouldn't you want to do an assessment of how the government is done? And it was a compelling argument
[Guest]: And I said, okay. Yeah, that makes sense to me. I've done a three-year, you know
[Guest]: Modinomics at three earlier and then I said, okay, maybe I can just build on that
[Guest]: But the more important context for this book is and then I'll get to the lessons what I think that were missed
[Guest]: Was this this slogan this kind of a statement by candidate Modi that he would do in 60
[Guest]: Months what others have not done in 60 years
[Guest]: That really stuck with me, you know because I was in the middle of the campaign
[Guest]: I would go on TV all the time and that particular statement was it really kind of drew people in but I knew
[Guest]: From an economic development perspective how unfair it was to all those who had come before him
[Guest]: So I think that is how I say I can if that gave me the kind of passion to write
[Guest]: I think for me that was the most important thing. In fact in this book
[Guest]: I constantly talk about that and I wanted to see that's why I wrote inheritance
[Guest]: The first part of this book is about inheritance. What did different prime ministers receive as inheritance?
[Guest]: I talked about Nehru and the six million refugees
[Guest]: Which was the biggest refugee crisis outside of World War two and also a lack of food
[Guest]: I mean those were the big challenges Nehru faced and then I kind of list what other prime ministers
[Guest]: Faced and all that and then so in some sense that is the context. I mean being unfair to predecessors
[Guest]: Belittling India's achievements and then trying to say that you would do something that I knew to be impossible
[Guest]: but you know, I think if you
[Guest]: If you ask most people in India
[Guest]: They'll say the demonetization and GST were the big big issues that come to mind from an economic management perspective
[Guest]: From my perspective it is more about the banking sector. I think that is the big, you know
[Guest]: lesson that they missed and
[Guest]: That is banking sector problems do not resolve themselves easily, right?
[Guest]: I mean and I think it was a budding
[Guest]: Banking sector crisis it was still I think much smaller than it is now at that time
[Guest]: There's plenty of evidence from around the world that these crises need to be tackled
[Guest]: sooner because you know, the banking sector is the lifeblood of the economy and
[Guest]: International institutions like the World Bank ADB IMF and and by the way the government's own
[Guest]: Department of Economic Affairs it all be there RBI
[Guest]: Everybody had been flagging this that this is a problem and I somehow feel that this was not addressed
[Guest]: Promptly and I think that may be one of the big reasons why the economy has not
[Guest]: Done as well and mind you demonetize the economy was slowing down before demonetization
[Guest]: For several quarters before demonetization happened. So I think the part of the reason is because
[Guest]: The system was clogged up. Well, you know corporate balance sheets are also kind of
[Guest]: Stressed so I think that was one lesson the other lesson. I mean, obviously, you know, I don't know
[Guest]: There's so many lessons from international development from India's own experience
[Guest]: We'd had joblessness for a long time
[Guest]: We had high growth but still we were not creating the kinds of decent jobs that we need our young people to
[Guest]: Take on I don't think there was sufficient focus on that
[Guest]: It was almost like you can just manufacture your way out of it without trying to understand
[Guest]: that the world had moved on and yet in some ways the industrialized for some time and
[Guest]: I'm not sure why we were not focusing on issues like education and I think this government also missed that opportunity
[Guest]: You know, why not education? Why not health? Why not?
[Guest]: malnutrition such Bharat is very important but
[Guest]: Malnutrition is what gives you productive citizenry for the future. So
[Guest]: When you have such a mandate when you have I don't know
[Guest]: But it's almost a wealth of experience and we're still not doing the things that we need to do. I you know, I'm
[Guest]: Frankly puzzled so I don't know why I think the kind of you know in my question the kind of
[Amit Varma]: Lessons I was referring to were not not the specifics which we'll come to when we talk about the period the five-year period
[Amit Varma]: Modi's term but more about broader lessons. For example much as Modi
[Amit Varma]: Criticized Nehru and in fact blames him for everything. He seems to have the same command and control
[Amit Varma]: Approach to the economy, which is perhaps not always apt as you point out and you know, you've written in your book about
[Amit Varma]: You know in your section on Indira Gandhi you cite Bhagwati and Panagariya and about how
[Amit Varma]: The state's dominance over economic affairs cost India in those years 65 to 75
[Amit Varma]: When India's per capita grew by 0.3 percent
[Amit Varma]: Per annum GDP growth during that period averaged 2.6 percent and and eventually
[Amit Varma]: You know that mindset was thrust aside and you know
[Amit Varma]: There were some reforms in the 80s and then more in 91 obviously forced by demon forced by liberalization
[Amit Varma]: Sorry, so my broader question was that in terms of mindset in in Modi's rhetoric
[Amit Varma]: It seemed that he had made a lot of those shifts like you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: He branded himself as a sort of a Thatcherite conservative and he was a bit of a
[Amit Varma]: Thatcherite conservative and whatever but in his actions, none of those really manifested, you know
[Amit Varma]: He had the same command and control mindset. He had the same top-down view and
[Amit Varma]: You know the importance of the state and economic affairs
[Amit Varma]: In those sense, what are the lessons that you would have liked to have seen?
[Amit Varma]: What are the lessons that other policymakers had learned but Modi hadn't learned or internalized?
[Guest]: I think it's not about learning lessons, you know in the sense that you know
[Guest]: We know that there are lessons that are people who will learn them others who are just not uh, you know
[Guest]: Prone to learning those kinds of things at all. And I think Modi's, you know, Modi was never a
[Guest]: Decentralizer in Gujarat, right? I mean Modi's uh, Modi was a strongman in Gujarat. That's how he did things
[Guest]: He was this decisive. So, you know been so so-called decisive leader who's going to basically
[Guest]: will everything into shape and uh, he managed lots of ministries and that's how he thought
[Guest]: He would manage India. And in fact, I talked about the centralizing instinct. Uh, you know, uh, I think in
[Guest]: Maybe the third part of the book where Panagariya basically talks about how you know
[Guest]: Modi did this and that and he was really
[Guest]: Focused on getting projects moving and all that whereas I was thinking that you know
[Guest]: He was centralizing things because that's what he knew. That's who he was
[Guest]: So it wasn't it's not as if he was suddenly going to change
[Guest]: I personally believe that once you're beyond 30, you're not going to change your core habits
[Guest]: So, uh, so I don't really think anybody should expect that he would somehow decentralize power
[Guest]: And I think the lesson for us as citizens and also as observers
[Guest]: is that
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: It really a lot depends on who's running the government in a country like India where?
[Guest]: We have a parliamentary democracy at the same time. We we look to someone to lead us and here we have someone who
[Guest]: Does not believe in the kind of decentralization that India needs because India is too vast too diverse too complicated
[Guest]: For any central force to run, you know, in fact, you know
[Guest]: My other research which I did not kind of incorporate in the book
[Guest]: Was about the role of states, you know, we we talk a lot about the center
[Guest]: We don't talk enough about the states. It's easy to say that the congress party or what did you guys do for 60 years?
[Guest]: Or meanwhile for the last 30 40 years
[Guest]: The congress has not been present in big states like Bihar and uh and up
[Guest]: Where bjp has been present in fits and starts in these kinds of states and in Madhya Pradesh and all this so
[Guest]: A lot of India's progress is about states. It's about districts
[Guest]: It's about the village level and I think that's where prime minister
[Guest]: Rajiv Gandhi had the correct instinct and that was decentralized because that's what so you need somebody at the top
[Guest]: Who'll say you know what if India has to really?
[Guest]: Progress the one good way to do that would be devolving more power
[Guest]: To other parts and I don't think so
[Guest]: even though lessons
[Guest]: Existed that you need to kind of have broad-based growth. You need to you know
[Guest]: Need to you know, decentralize you need local level kind of people to take up their development issues
[Guest]: but those lessons could not have been learned by Modi because had he learned them he would have
[Guest]: You know, he would have paid attention to them in Gujarat as well
[Guest]: But that's not who he is. So to expect him to learn those lessons, I think is uh, you know
[Guest]: To my mind would not be correct. We should just basically say that
[Guest]: Today it's Modi tomorrow. It could be somebody else. That's somebody else and the kind of power you wield
[Guest]: May have something to do with what how India progresses in the future
[Guest]: Mind you that is that maybe one of the reasons coalitions are you have proven to be not the disaster
[Guest]: That the BJP portrays them to be
[Guest]: Maybe coalitions are better because you have a lot of give and take you don't have a central authority and you're just going to say
[Guest]: Okay, everybody gets a piece of the pie and maybe that is how India can develop
[Guest]: But having a strong central character, I don't think it works. I don't think it has worked
[Guest]: I think it has worked to the detriment of the country in the last five years and every time there's a
[Guest]: I fear that every time there's a centralizing force India does not stand to gain
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you and you know at a time where institutions are being weakened
[Amit Varma]: I think another advantage of a coalition government is that you have more checks and balances by default in the political economy
[Amit Varma]: Where other institutions which are supposed to perform that role may not quite be able to before we get started on the book in the Modi years
[Amit Varma]: A final question about
[Amit Varma]: UPA 1 and UPA 2 now what mistakes do you think the congress made which will cause their huge defeat in
[Amit Varma]: 2014 and obviously this period of time the 10 years before that are not a monolithic period
[Amit Varma]: There were periods of growth. There were periods of very good economic management
[Amit Varma]: There were periods of very bad economic management
[Amit Varma]: There were periods of very bad economic management such as when Pranam Mukherjee was finance minister, for example
[Amit Varma]: And you know that reflected in all the data
[Amit Varma]: So, you know
[Amit Varma]: What do you think was like in a sense a failure of at some level and you acknowledge this in the book as well
[Amit Varma]: They didn't do as well as they should have and that
[Amit Varma]: Enabled Modi to sweep to power in 2014. Can you can you kind of sum that up for me?
[Guest]: You know, I think of Modi's rise
[Guest]: And this amazing victory that the BJP had in 2014. It was like this perfect storm
[Guest]: The economy was losing steam and I can i've talked about how that happened
[Guest]: on the other hand
[Guest]: You had these corruption scandals, you know, some of them were
[Guest]: Clearly scandals others were not as clear
[Guest]: Then you had vast kind of organized carder based party that was becoming an alternative and on the other hand you had
[Guest]: You know this pent-up
[Guest]: demand from
[Guest]: Young people for jobs and a better life because they could see on their smartphones what other people around the world had
[Guest]: And finally you had the messenger
[Guest]: And was a very unique messenger and had been built up over the years as a kind of a messiah
[Guest]: So this is a perfect storm of all these things coming together
[Guest]: That I think delivered this victory. It wasn't any one thing as far as the UPS time is concerned
[Guest]: Of course, you're right. I mean there was there were periods of high growth and
[Guest]: and good development poverty reduction
[Guest]: but I think
[Guest]: to my mind
[Guest]: When we look at the 2008 crisis and the response to that, of course the response to that was a pretty big fiscal stimulus
[Guest]: At that time by the way, not as I record in the book not as big as uh,
[Guest]: What the us did and what china did but of course, we we did not face the same severity of the crisis as they did
[Guest]: But I think we were not able to handle that because that that really you know
[Guest]: uh
[Guest]: If you remember in the aftermath of the global financial crisis india continued growing
[Guest]: And then it kind of you know, I think it was a sugar high in some ways and was hard to sustain sugar highs, right?
[Guest]: so, uh
[Guest]: So I think that was a problem. Of course that uh, you know, there was inflationary issues
[Guest]: fiscal deficit and you know, unfortunately the way we manage fiscal deficits in the country and
[Guest]: I think this was true in our times too and more I think so even in this government's time
[Guest]: You know, you'll sell you'll basically
[Guest]: You know, you'll take one
[Guest]: government-owned
[Guest]: entity and then
[Guest]: Take up a position in some other government take up the government stake in
[Guest]: Some other entity and then you say we balance the books and you know
[Guest]: I think those kinds of things ultimately hurt hurt india
[Guest]: Or hurt an economy. The other issue is that even we did not
[Guest]: focus on
[Guest]: You know, what would sustain?
[Guest]: progress
[Guest]: And to my mind, you know and here amartya sen has been talking about it all the time
[Guest]: And I know he gets a lot of good parts
[Guest]: uh from the right
[Guest]: But you know unless we invest in human capital human development
[Guest]: There is no chance for india to succeed in today's world. There's absolutely no chance
[Guest]: Uh, so if you do not invest in health if you do not invest in education the right way if you do not actually
[Guest]: Spend the money properly. I have this
[Guest]: anecdote in the book about a village called bandi paeen in baramulla where I worked uh,
[Guest]: For two years before the 2014 election and bandi paeen has eight government schools
[Guest]: It's a one kilometer long half kilometer wide at its widest village with eight government schools
[Guest]: One high school three middle schools four primary schools. I don't know what the current situation is at that time
[Guest]: That was the situation. None of the schools had adequate
[Guest]: teachers or students or there's no furniture
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: We should have had one school
[Guest]: Maybe even that may not have been viable for that village. You could kind of create a model
[Guest]: You could kind of consolidate you could bring in
[Guest]: You know teachers to uh work in one place. So teachers there would be enough teachers
[Guest]: There'd be enough students, but that's not how we've done things
[Guest]: We've just kind of so before we increase the budget for these things. I really would like to see more efficient spending also
[Guest]: so so I I think that um sustaining that progress, you know, of course I talked about the number of things that happened that led
[Guest]: ultimately to our terrible defeat, but I think we should have paid more attention to sustaining that progress and
[Guest]: And we should have also been more careful about the sugar high. We had to kind of calibrate that better
[Guest]: I think we we did not and frankly i'm not in a position to tell why that
[Guest]: May have been the case what they were thinking at that time. I was in the us at that time
[Guest]: I can tell you that at the world bank and the imf we were
[Guest]: Very very worried extremely worried that the global economy was falling off a cliff
[Guest]: And everybody was panicking frankly
[Guest]: So I can't I can imagine that in india the policy makers must have been like wondering
[Guest]: What can we do to save this crisis off and they they did what they did
[Guest]: But I wonder if we put enough thought into how progress could be sustained
[Guest]: Maybe we could have gone with a slightly lower growth and then uh, you know, uh, that meant smaller fiscal stimulus
[Guest]: Uh, maybe calibrated that better of course, uh,
[Guest]: The scandals that hit us. I mean, you know, that is something that and the other thing is that if the scandals hit us
[Guest]: Where is the accountability?
[Guest]: So I think that we don't really have accountability mechanisms that are that really, you know, we should have something right?
[Guest]: I mean something happened and uh, but uh, even this comment has not been able to kind of
[Guest]: Hold people accountable. Uh, and uh, so I think it's all about
[Guest]: Political kind of maneuvering then uh, so keeping people bogged down
[Guest]: But i'm afraid that's not the way, you know, india can reach its potential. I just don't I had a recent episode with
[Amit Varma]: Pooja Mehra recently where you know, we spoke about the political economy of those years in a fair bit of detail
[Amit Varma]: I'll put that link on my episode page for the listeners
[Amit Varma]: Uh, you know just a brief detour on education while you were talking about that
[Amit Varma]: I think one thing that both parties have consistently gone got wrong on education is something that in fact
[Amit Varma]: You referred to at the start as something that you know
[Amit Varma]: The world bank taught you not to do which is to focus on inputs instead of outcomes
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you you had the bjp in the 2014 manifesto saying we'll spend six percent of gdp on education
[Amit Varma]: And I think the congress made a similar promise
[Amit Varma]: Uh this time but that's just looking at the input and outputs are miserable and for that you need to look partly
[Amit Varma]: At the way education is structured the incentives in play the fact that the private sector is completely
[Amit Varma]: shut out through
[Amit Varma]: You know an immense amount of over regulation, but you know, leaving that leaving that aside
[Amit Varma]: There's a broader philosophical question really that I wanted to ask you about the political economy
[Amit Varma]: That doesn't apply to this party or to that party
[Amit Varma]: But you know the thought came to me when I uh, i'll just quote from your book
[Amit Varma]: You quote these economists quote while ghatak and ghosh who pointed out. Um
[Amit Varma]: About what the upa was going through in 2014
[Amit Varma]: Quote, it is a unique misfortune for any party to be charged with both crony capitalism and unbridled welfarism
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote and uh, you know the thought that came to me was that
[Amit Varma]: This is actually an inevitable accusation for any government become because of the imperatives of politics on the one hand
[Amit Varma]: You have interest groups who have funded you whom you have to satisfy. So crony capitalism seems inevitable and on the other hand
[Amit Varma]: You know, you need to buy vote banks
[Amit Varma]: So you need to appeal to voters and the populism that leads to welfarism also seems inevitable
[Amit Varma]: So just as a broader question not as a member of one party or any party
[Amit Varma]: Because I think this is a dilemma that the whole political system faces. How does one get past this?
[Amit Varma]: The analogy to this is the following
[Guest]: When you talk about somebody who's a reformer
[Guest]: They say do you want reforms? Do you want someone who's a pro business person? Or do you want someone who's a pro market person?
[Guest]: From my perspective pro market, right? You don't want to be pro business. You don't want anybody to be pro business
[Guest]: You want somebody to be pro business?
[Guest]: You don't want anybody to be pro business. You want somebody to create a level playing field?
[Guest]: You want markets to flourish and then people can compete that is what I've learned in my life
[Guest]: That is what my training is. I don't know. I think the evidence indicates that
[Guest]: That is where people should be
[Guest]: Make these markets let them grow let them flourish and let people compete
[Guest]: Don't try to pick winners. Don't try to support one
[Guest]: business versus another
[Guest]: Similarly as far as you know, you want to promote capitalism. Yes
[Guest]: But crony capitalism is this kind of disease that that is just not going to allow you to
[Guest]: Make decisions that would help you become a pro market reformer
[Guest]: So it's all very well to say, you know
[Guest]: We need funding and we need funding to kind of fight elections because that's what we need
[Guest]: And then we can once we are in government, we can kind of do welfare politics. The trouble is
[Guest]: It doesn't really work that way in reality what what happens ultimately is that these interest groups
[Guest]: They capture it's part of this elite capture, right? I mean, there is a reason we have high inequality in india and growing
[Guest]: And that is because we we are perhaps not
[Guest]: Leveling the playing field. We're not supporting markets. We may be supporting mr
[Guest]: X we may be supporting mr. X or mrs. Y because they may fund us through through whatever means
[Guest]: Uh, but we never tell people exactly what they're doing, uh, you know for us
[Guest]: So as a citizen, I want to know
[Guest]: Who is paying the government off and what is the government doing in return for this person?
[Guest]: We don't know
[Guest]: We simply don't know and I don't i'm not blaming the multi-government for this or you know
[Guest]: This is like a cross-government kind of thing now with electoral bonds
[Guest]: It's kind of legalized corruption to my mind. This is legalized corruption
[Guest]: We can't have these kinds of things
[Guest]: If we can't see the destitution in which so many millions of indians live
[Guest]: And then we don't correlate that with what is happening at the upper levels upper income levels
[Guest]: Then we're just basically saying okay, you know what it's good to have you know, at least we see that some people are progressing
[Guest]: But that is not a model that india can really work with but that is a model that we're working with
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: This cronyism is is a special kind of disease. I mean, why can't our corporates they already have a lead, right?
[Guest]: They're already running ahead
[Guest]: Why can't they just uh, you know
[Guest]: Uh, if they want to contribute to a party
[Guest]: Fine contribute tell people what you're doing and then we'll see whether there is any uh quid pro quo
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: You already have a lead and you want you want to pad that lead
[Guest]: through
[Guest]: Influence peddling and all that stuff. I think that's what
[Guest]: To my mind that hurts that hurts growth
[Guest]: That is not pro-growth and we must find ways and you know, I keep telling my colleagues in the congress party as well
[Guest]: We've got to find well, we've already said that we're going to do away with electoral bonds
[Guest]: But we want to bring a lot more transparency
[Guest]: to political finance
[Guest]: Because uh, because without that I think this cronyism will continue you'll continue to see jobless growth
[Guest]: You'll continue to see higher inequality and that is ultimately going to lead to some
[Guest]: Cataclysm in the future which I worry about
[Guest]: So if we don't change course, this is what we'll get we'll get more of the same
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I I could agree with you more about the need for transparency and and the problem here, you know
[Amit Varma]: as public choice service would say is one of
[Amit Varma]: a diffuse costs and concentrated benefits because
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's right. You know the people who really lose out from
[Amit Varma]: The government being pro-business instead of pro-markets are the people at large and the costs are diffused and invisible often the unseen as it were
[Amit Varma]: Uh, whereas, you know, you have these interest groups who have you know concentrated benefits
[Amit Varma]: So obviously they will lobby for whatever
[Amit Varma]: Let's let's kind of move on to the Modi years and you know
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that kind of struck me
[Amit Varma]: About your book is that reading it it did not seem to me at all that this is coming from someone partisan as you'd expect
[Amit Varma]: You know given that the author is a congress spokesperson
[Amit Varma]: But it didn't feel that way at all
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I want to quote a couple of sentences from your book on how you felt after Modi came to power
[Amit Varma]: Quote I for one was certain that transformation was around the corner given Modi's sweeping victory
[Amit Varma]: The massive defeat of my own political party his oratory and genuine popularity
[Amit Varma]: As well as his stature as the undisputed leader of the bjp
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote and later on in the same page. You say quote the secret is out despite serious reservations
[Amit Varma]: I wanted Modi to succeed in transforming the indian economy
[Amit Varma]: I also hoped he would reign in the worst impulses of his political support base that were damaging to the country
[Amit Varma]: Uh stop quote and you know one the basic thesis of your book which you set out is that given what he promised?
[Amit Varma]: What he has delivered is a great disappointment
[Amit Varma]: Which of course is true and you make that case very well
[Amit Varma]: Uh, but all of this also seems to indicate that you actually liked some of what he promised
[Unknown]: Oh, yeah, I mean, of course, I mean, you know, uh, the
[Unknown]: The talk was of reforms the talk was of uh transforming, you know
[Guest]: The economy in ways that you know, uh, basically taking a different trajectory
[Guest]: So, you know whenever you hear about reform somebody like myself has been trained
[Guest]: uh in this area and you know, we always hope that uh leaders come in and they or governments come in and they
[Guest]: Enact the kinds of reforms that are needed because in india, of course, you know, uh, we still are looking
[Guest]: For some of those reforms. So I think uh those kinds of things one couldn't disagree with right?
[Guest]: I mean, uh, they talked about the banking sector at problem. They talked about fixing those problems
[Guest]: I mean who could disagree with that?
[Guest]: They talked about ease of doing business and how they wanted to improve uh on that and who could disagree with that
[Guest]: I mean because you knew that those are the kinds of things that are needed
[Guest]: So the rhetoric was a lot of the rhetoric was uh good, right? I mean who would disagree with uh, you know
[Guest]: Streamlining a food supply chain, you know from the farms to the dining table. I mean the rhetoric was great
[Guest]: uh, it was excellent, uh, but uh
[Guest]: Um, and that is what I you know was saying. Yeah
[Guest]: Agriculture needs reforms
[Guest]: I mean, that's where so many of our people are employed and that needs reforms
[Guest]: So and you know talking about government needs to uh be reformed government needs to be uh more efficient
[Guest]: And this was all that we heard during the 2014 election. So of course, you know, let's face it
[Guest]: I mean people like us. I mean, we are we have a very uh comfortable life
[Guest]: But there are so many millions of people who are very very poor
[Guest]: They they are like second class citizens and there's very little hope for them
[Guest]: And and then you have something where you say, okay, you know what if the economy does well if the growth is broad-based
[Guest]: If it is inclusive
[Guest]: These people have a chance that if not them at least the children will see a better a better life
[Guest]: That's what you want. That's what you aspire for. That's what you aspire to. That's what you you know
[Guest]: It's always dream of and I think in that sense. Yeah, I was I was very hopeful
[Guest]: Um, and that is why I can call it the great disappointment
[Guest]: Because those things did not pan out the way I had hoped they would now
[Guest]: Or the way we had been, you know led to believe I know, you know during the launch of this book in delhi raghav bhail
[Guest]: At the quint he was on the panel and he said that this is the great betrayal not the great disappointment
[Guest]: And I think i've heard something similar from other people. Why did you call it the great disappointment?
[Guest]: Why didn't you call it the great betrayal or worse and I said because I was hopeful and
[Guest]: I mean as somebody who wants reforms who wants good for who wants, uh, something positive to happen to
[Guest]: Those who don't have a voice in a political discourse who are living in on the margins
[Guest]: Uh, you want something good to happen for them? And uh, yeah, so that's I wanted
[Guest]: Uh to believe it and that's the truth. I also worried of course
[Guest]: I worried about the rss bjp politics and that never ends well, frankly of dividing
[Guest]: People polarizing people and that by the way, it can be detrimental to the economy as well
[Guest]: And I think that's what we will see that in the future too. If this continues it is going to have an impact
[Amit Varma]: right, so, you know the sentiment that raghav expressed of it being a great betrayal is one that I totally get because
[Amit Varma]: a lot of free market supporters and
[Amit Varma]: Uh, you know conservatives and that sense reformers, uh had a lot of hope of modi
[Amit Varma]: For example to quote from your book you have something about his manifesto here quote the manifesto boldly declared bjp to be a modern and inclusive
[Amit Varma]: Party relegating its pet projects such as the ram temple uniform civil code and cow protection to the peripheries of the document
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote and one thing i've kind of wondered is now that you know
[Amit Varma]: They've turned the other way. They've completely turned their back on reform and everything comes down to the kind of polarizing politics
[Amit Varma]: Uh that they seem to have, you know put on the back burner
[Amit Varma]: What i'm wondering is that why this rebranding as a conservative thatcherite in the first place?
[Amit Varma]: It was obviously a false rebranding
[Amit Varma]: But what drove the rebranding was it the visual thinking of free market supporters like raghav?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it his own shrewd positioning and if he was repositioning himself in that way?
[Amit Varma]: I'm a little confused about why because there aren't too many of us. So, you know, where did he see the advantage in that?
[Guest]: I think I tackled this part
[Guest]: In part two of the book where I kind of talk about his rise and you know i've written about this
[Guest]: And others have too that you know gujarat. It isn't as if when you know, andre modi gujarat
[Guest]: Was so exceptional that gujarat was never like that. Gujarat had been growing at high high rates for a long time
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: but of course
[Guest]: Modi somehow there was this I don't know I
[Guest]: I found all these disparate kind of loose kind of connections to people kind of
[Guest]: Coming up with this idea of oh, there's a reformer
[Guest]: He's doing great things in gujarat the vibrant gujarat summits and he really wants he's a limited government guy
[Guest]: and I talk about
[Guest]: Actually, there's an interesting google hangout that I mentioned with sadanand dhume and milan vashnav and nehil sharma and
[Guest]: James crabtree and they're all kind of debating this idea whether this guy is a thatcherite or is he something else and
[Guest]: But there was an effort and I think the effort was it was in some ways to my mind
[Guest]: It was about evolving a different image
[Guest]: I mean, of course modi's image had been tainted by gujarat 2002
[Guest]: and I think there was a concerted effort to kind of build him up as something different and
[Guest]: Maybe even somewhat liberal
[Guest]: Somewhat, you know, he's a reformer and he wants
[Guest]: An efficient government. He's anti-corruption. He talks about bringing in power supply. He talks about daughters
[Guest]: So I think there was clearly an attempt and I think some people did it because they wanted to help him and
[Guest]: Maybe that was part of the rebranding others. Maybe needed someone to latch on to like I think
[Guest]: frankly
[Guest]: Agwati wanted to
[Guest]: Basically say that yes, finally. We have someone who understands us
[Guest]: Maybe bhagwati went with that hope that this is what i've been advocating. There's a guy
[Guest]: You know who talks like this at least and maybe this is this guy is truly a reformer
[Guest]: Without going deeper into whether or not he was a reformer or not and also sidelining what his past was
[Guest]: In 2002 and before that so maybe there was hope for people like bhagwati, you know
[Guest]: Because they've been desperately looking for someone who is right of center in a country that is deeply left of center
[Guest]: Or has been for a long long time. So, uh, I don't know maybe it's a combination
[Guest]: A concerted effort to refurbish a tinted image and then also hope on the right
[Guest]: of the economic spectrum that
[Guest]: We finally found somebody who who is our own and I think
[Guest]: That did not really work. Well
[Amit Varma]: And and you know one of the things that is almost poignant in a sense for me is that a lot of these supporters
[Amit Varma]: Um, you know who might have supported him for good reasons at the time
[Amit Varma]: Once it all began to unravel they continued rationalizing their support for him
[Amit Varma]: You know, for example bhagwati wrote an article in support of demonetization after it happened
[Amit Varma]: And demonetization had a bunch of other cheerleaders who really should have known better because it's you know
[Amit Varma]: econ 101 tells you that that's a disaster and
[Amit Varma]: You know, which is kind of sad
[Amit Varma]: But in general like you said you were hopeful at the start in 2014 and so were a lot of other people
[Amit Varma]: At what point did one begin to realize that it wasn't as you know
[Amit Varma]: There wasn't so much reason for hope like you have a quote in your book from patabhanu metha who writes in 2015
[Amit Varma]: Uh quote instead of clarity there is confusion you get the sense
[Amit Varma]: There is no coherence to the economic narrative. It will swirl with the wind not giving confidence to anyone
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote and and things have already changed by then
[Amit Varma]: When did you begin to realize that all this was just rhetoric and nothing was going to happen?
[Amit Varma]: I think for me it was
[Guest]: I don't know. I mean I I can't really pinpoint the date, uh, because
[Guest]: I I felt that the honeymoon didn't last as long as I thought it would last
[Guest]: frankly
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: When he went into the land fight
[Guest]: You know remember they started going out after the land fight
[Guest]: Uh early on I wasn't quite sure. Uh, you know whether it was a reformist move
[Guest]: Or was it because it wasn't being done?
[Guest]: Uh at the behest of some particularly large groups of businesses
[Guest]: So I wasn't sure about that for me, I think
[Guest]: Uh when I saw the first year the first year didn't seem like anything special because uh, there was nothing, you know
[Guest]: I would have liked to see you know, you know, the the the the
[Guest]: There's nothing, you know, I would have liked to see even then a little bit on the banking sector
[Guest]: I didn't really see a lot on that
[Guest]: And I think there was this move to kind of get pro installed projects moving. I I you could see that
[Guest]: Land act, you know, you could have gone both ways, you know, yeah, maybe it's a reformist move
[Guest]: Maybe he's just doing it as part of helping some uh, friends
[Guest]: uh, but when he started kind of uh, uh, you know when he
[Guest]: uh, when rahul gandhi landed that jab
[Guest]: Of the suit booth
[Guest]: And by the way that whole suit thing
[Guest]: I think that really worried me actually the suit thing was emblematic of what i've been seeing in other places actually
[Guest]: So that the suit thing bothered me because the suit thing told me that maybe this guy is not as
[Guest]: as
[Guest]: Big as he uh appeared to be, you know, maybe he's
[Guest]: You know, uh, he's like a regular strongman who is insecure
[Guest]: Who likes these cheap things and if that is the case, maybe this is not a broad-minded kind of person
[Guest]: So the suit thing really did bother me a lot. It came as a warning sign
[Guest]: I must tell you that uh, it was not about uh, oh, it's 10 lakh rupees suit and all that it was more about
[Guest]: What the thinking is behind wearing and if someone were to give me a million dollar suit, which is salman and his souls
[Guest]: I would never wear it. It's just it's I don't know. I wouldn't know i'm sure you would not wear it
[Guest]: I mean who does that?
[Guest]: Only somebody who's kind of has some sort of an
[Guest]: Some sort of a complex. I don't know and strongmen do come with those kinds of things and they do kind of ultimately land
[Guest]: themselves in trouble
[Guest]: I think that was it the revision of the gdp in january of 2015 and not having the back series
[Guest]: Within a matter of months. I think that also told me something, uh about the government. I think that was
[Guest]: Many people did not talk about it then but I felt that was a problem
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: So, yeah, I think there were some warning signs early on
[Guest]: Uh, by the way, I documented the book that some of his closest supporters were even more pressured because they kind of showed unease
[Guest]: Early on not people like me his own supporters
[Guest]: Uh, so maybe they were more impatient. Uh, I was maybe willing to uh, you know go along and see how it pans out
[Guest]: But I would say within the first year itself. I think it was clear that this wasn't going to be a reformist government
[Amit Varma]: Right. So let's talk about like, you know, you've got a very detailed breakdown of all the things that
[Amit Varma]: Went wrong. So let's let's kind of start talking about them one by one
[Amit Varma]: And and and one of them of course is the whole make in india project
[Amit Varma]: And you know as part of when you're talking about the analysis of the make in india project and how it went wrong
[Amit Varma]: You also quote raghu ram rajan from uh, you know
[Amit Varma]: Contrasting india with china and saying that look what worked for china may not work well for us. We're developing differently
[Amit Varma]: It's a different time and quote we should be agnostic about what will work stop quote
[Amit Varma]: And and this seemed to me to be a very profound point
[Amit Varma]: Especially, you know, you could quote hayek at the start of the chapter and it seems that one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: And it seems that one quality which policymakers should always
[Amit Varma]: Have when they're making policy is epistemic humility that you can't actually control everything and you have to
[Amit Varma]: You know let society and the market work
[Amit Varma]: some things out and and this is completely and the make in india seems to sort of
[Amit Varma]: um
[Amit Varma]: Showcase some of this top-down drive that modi has tell me a little bit about what was wrong with it and what went wrong
[Guest]: Well, there's something it's a very basic point I think when china and uh,
[Guest]: of course korea, uh started
[Guest]: Their labor intensive push
[Guest]: That was 40 years back. The world has changed
[Guest]: The world is very different now compared to what the world was then I mean at a at a very basic level
[Guest]: You've got to at least pause and think
[Guest]: Uh, and you know, this is not just for modi. This is for my own party
[Guest]: This is for my own party. This is for other policy makers
[Guest]: Let's face it
[Guest]: 2020 is not 1918
[Guest]: Okay, if it is not a lot has changed and technology has a lot to do with that you cannot start thinking of
[Guest]: Developing the way some country did in 1980. You can learn some lessons from that
[Guest]: But you cannot just say okay now i'm going to replicate that model
[Guest]: Because that's not who you are. That's not that's not the time you're living in
[Guest]: So I don't really get why it is so hard for people to
[Guest]: Understand that uh, you know, oh we can't just replicate this country's model that that country's model
[Guest]: Yes, you can adapt things and all that but you you must kind of also look at you know, there's plenty of
[Guest]: material written on this about how
[Guest]: developing countries
[Guest]: Are are not able to uh, not just india other countries are not able to replicate the chinese model
[Guest]: And there are good reasons for that. So
[Guest]: This whole idea that I have to push this manufacturing
[Guest]: Output to 25 percent of gdp i'm going to do this that I think perhaps there is some hubris about
[Guest]: How one person one strong government can do this and that you know, I can dictate this level of
[Guest]: this level of
[Guest]: manufacturing output, but that's not how
[Guest]: Decision makers who are at the at the firm level make the decisions
[Guest]: Their decisions are about whether or not they're going to make some money out of it. They don't care if um
[Guest]: They may vote for modigy, but they're not going to vote by they're not going to you know, pay for it
[Guest]: They're just going to do what is in their self-interest and their interest is in making money
[Guest]: Their interest is not in losing money just because they have to vote for modigy or to make his make in india project successful
[Guest]: so I think uh, frankly the biggest reason I think was that uh, the indian economy is very different, you know,
[Guest]: Structurally, uh, and the time is very different
[Guest]: And setting these targets of only within five years or ten years. We're going to do this and it's going to be 25
[Guest]: percent and knowing that it has been stagnant for a while despite all effort and knowing that there's
[Guest]: Technology that actually is and india is a capital intensive country to begin with at least its manufacturing sector is
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: Knowing all that still trying to kind of say are we going to have labor intensive industrialization?
[Guest]: And I don't know. I think it's just basically you're not willing to accept
[Guest]: That there is a reality that you must contend with and you think that you can just change reality because you're in government
[Guest]: It doesn't work that way
[Amit Varma]: Right. We'll take a quick commercial break and we'll be back
[Unknown]: Hello everybody, welcome to a great new week of shows on the ivm podcast network
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do and if you're not by now, why aren't you?
[Unknown]: You really really should we're ivm podcasts on twitter facebook and instagram this week
[Unknown]: We got a couple of new shows launching
[Unknown]: The first one we have is adkt talent 10th. The show is hosted by rohit p man perera and krupa goel
[Unknown]: They're joined by the best talent from college classrooms across the country tune in every tuesday for music poetry and fun ramblings
[Unknown]: Business dot next by bloomberg quinn learn about what it takes to nurture a culture of constant innovation in business and shape an organization
[Unknown]: It's hosted by govindraj athiraj and new episodes are out every tuesday
[Unknown]: The equity sahi podcast is brought to you by the motilal oswal asset management company
[Unknown]: It's hosted by our very own anupam gupta and offers deep investment insights into sectors and stocks in a simple way
[Unknown]: New episodes out every tuesday on cyrus says sports presenter and commentator ronak kapoor talks about how his school life shaped him for the future
[Unknown]: How sports commentary has evolved his experience at the cricket world cup in australia and more on pesa
[Unknown]: Vesa anupam is joined by financial educator and money mentor mrin agarwal to discuss investor behavior and the importance of creating a financial plan
[Unknown]: On the ronnie screwballer podcast dreaming with your eyes open ronnie talks to me about his early life moving from grant road to brish candy
[Unknown]: Organizing a rock concert in his youth and taking calculated risks in life on dating his garbage
[Unknown]: Abbas and janam talked to zain and avanti the hosts of marbles lost and found about the role of mental health in a relationship
[Unknown]: On what a player akash and siddhartha joined by fellow comedian mikhail almeida to discuss the last week of the ongoing cricket league before the playoffs
[Unknown]: On the habit coach ashton talks about financial health the relationship one develops with money and how it leaves an impact on our body
[Unknown]: On puliyabazi pranay and saurabh talk to shambhavi naik a fellow at the takshashila institute about gene sequencing
[Unknown]: And how is changing our understanding of heredity and human history and with that let's get you on with your show
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen i'm chatting with salman soz about his book the great disappointment
[Amit Varma]: And how modi let all of us down, you know another opportunity missed perhaps by the modi government was
[Amit Varma]: Uh, which you mentioned was a remarkable windfall
[Amit Varma]: They got with the low oil prices like in your book
[Amit Varma]: You talk about how between 2011 and 2014 crude prices averaged 108.5 dollars per barrel between 2015 and 2017
[Amit Varma]: They averaged only 59.3 dollars per barrel and um the modi government could have chosen to pass this or a significant part of this
[Amit Varma]: To the consumers, uh so that we would have more money to spend, uh, but he didn't tell me a little bit about this
[Guest]: Yeah, actually i'm i'm a little puzzled by this, you know, of course, I mean there are
[Guest]: deficit talks because people believe that fiscal deficits can uh,
[Guest]: Land you in deep trouble that that was the experience after the global financial crisis
[Guest]: And of course you want to protect the macro economic situation
[Guest]: But you know
[Guest]: Like I talked about earlier, you know when the up was in power and perhaps the fiscal stimulus, uh ended up being too much
[Guest]: In this particular case, I think the fiscal restraint was just too much
[Guest]: I mean you think of what was going on and you know, i've spoken about this earlier in other conversations in
[Guest]: 2014 and 2015
[Guest]: Uh, there were two successive droughts
[Guest]: When you have successive droughts
[Guest]: What is the policy framework that you employed you actually went with the minimum support prices that you had you actually?
[Guest]: kept them
[Guest]: You know pretty low, uh, the growth was pretty low. In fact, so reason palla wrote
[Guest]: Wrote a column on how this is amazing and it's kind of you know, in fact, there's uh, you know, uh, he's very happy
[Guest]: so when you have
[Guest]: A demand compression you your policy response at that time was that uh, you it was contractionary
[Guest]: then
[Guest]: You had this great windfall and the
[Guest]: Prime minister called himself nibala
[Guest]: Wonderful fine, of course. It's helping you. Uh, lower your inflation. It's helping you maintain your fiscal deficit at
[Guest]: Reasonable levels you're going on the glide path towards a three percent fiscal deficit target
[Guest]: But then why do you?
[Guest]: Why do you uh, take this entire windfall?
[Guest]: And um, you know, uh take it for the government. I don't really get it. It's not as if government spending is very efficient
[Guest]: I mean, I would get it if government spending was more efficient than household, uh spending but it isn't I think we all know that
[Guest]: So what I thought should have been done was because the economy was uh, you know
[Guest]: Facing some headwinds in terms of the agricultural sector
[Guest]: Not doing well
[Guest]: You kind of say, you know what we'll loosen the purse strings a little bit
[Guest]: We keep some of the windfall but pass some of the windfall over to consumers let them spend
[Guest]: But they instead what they did was they actually, you know, this was the second contractionary policy
[Guest]: So it was exactly the opposite of what I felt should have been done
[Guest]: So you took msps and you know in some ways flatline them
[Guest]: Then you took uh, the oil windfall and you basically kept it for yourself
[Guest]: And of course i'm sure wasted a lot of money and sure enough
[Guest]: Your investments were not doing well. Anyway
[Guest]: Your exports were not doing well. Anyway, and of course
[Guest]: You charted a path towards demonetization
[Guest]: And I think there were five quarters of declining growth before demonetization if i'm not mistaken
[Guest]: So I don't get it. I don't understand. I really don't understand why this path was followed
[Guest]: I don't understand why they needed a contractionary policy
[Guest]: At a time when the economy was not doing well
[Guest]: I could understand it if the economy was overheating
[Guest]: And then they wanted to curb the growth but here there was no evidence that the economy was overheating
[Amit Varma]: So i'm puzzled. So I want to again ask you a broader question, but taking off from this issue
[Amit Varma]: You know, i'll quote again from your book where you say quote
[Amit Varma]: I am not convinced that more revenues in the hand of the government is a good thing
[Amit Varma]: The quality of government spending is dubious and at a time when the economy was
[Amit Varma]: Recovering from the blows of demonetization on the gst a little bit of help for consumers
[Amit Varma]: Could have had a salutary effect on the economy stop quote and I was very struck by this sort of first line of
[Amit Varma]: More revenues in the hands of the government not necessarily being a good thing because
[Amit Varma]: Very often you see governments, especially the modi government recently boasting about higher tax revenues
[Amit Varma]: And whenever I hear that boast I always think that hey, that's a bad thing because you've got more
[Amit Varma]: Money passing from the productive part of the economy to the parasitic part of the
[Amit Varma]: Economy what what is your is that your general philosophic view or did you mention or did you mean it only in this context?
[Guest]: No, I mean look, I mean, uh, it's a tricky part for me, right? I mean on the one hand, uh, you know
[Guest]: I I do feel that government spending can be pretty uh, you know is relatively inefficient
[Guest]: Especially in countries like india in many other countries. It may be somewhat inefficient, but it's also you know
[Guest]: You provide the kinds of services that people really need and so it's kind of a social contract, right?
[Guest]: I mean you pay me money. I deliver you certain services and the government has a role
[Guest]: Of course the public sector has a role and i'm happy to by the way note here just a bit of a plug for the congress
[Guest]: Manifesto that we talk about uh the role of uh, the private sector as a lead for
[Guest]: Investments and and growth the government being in a supporting role for the provision of public goods
[Guest]: Now in india's case, I think there is plenty of evidence which suggests that we don't spend the government doesn't spend money. Well
[Guest]: Uh, and so to say that oh now we have a lot more money to spend unwisely
[Guest]: I think is uh, you know
[Guest]: Not a good thing. In fact, I think we've created this whole
[Guest]: Environment where we say oh
[Guest]: Everything is corruption. Everything is black money. Everything is bad
[Guest]: And I think that is that is hurting the economy frankly, uh, because
[Guest]: You know when you have money in the hands of people in a country like india where government spending is not very efficient
[Guest]: I think it's okay. I think that's where you might create opportunities
[Guest]: In fact, if you leave more money in the hands of people
[Guest]: And let them make their decisions and you as government actually really
[Guest]: Let them do their work get get out of the way
[Guest]: India might actually progress faster
[Guest]: Because india is not
[Guest]: Europe india is not america. India is india
[Guest]: India's government systems
[Guest]: Are have very limited. I think implementation capacity
[Guest]: So in that kind of a scenario, I think letting the people do their own heavy lifting might be better
[Guest]: So, um, i'm all for it. I think that's a good point
[Guest]: So, um, i'm all for leaving more i'm i'm not convinced by the argument that the government should have more revenues and then will do amazing
[Guest]: things
[Guest]: uh
[Guest]: Because if that were the case then the money that the government had would be spent much more
[Guest]: Wisely and we would not have you know, eight government schools in bandipan
[Guest]: Or by the way, we would not have a middle school right in the heart of a baramulla town
[Guest]: where there were
[Guest]: nine kids in eight grades and 12 teachers
[Guest]: I mean
[Guest]: so, uh
[Guest]: We we have to keep in mind
[Guest]: That in india in india's context, we're not talking about other countries. We're talking about india in india's context
[Guest]: Uh where by the way accountability is limited anyway
[Guest]: More money in the hands of government is not necessarily a good thing
[Guest]: So I when people talk about higher tax revenues i'm not this whole tax business is just uh, it's become too much
[Guest]: It's like a it's another kind of uh vested interest, you know, you know how to
[Guest]: how how money exchange, uh, you know,
[Guest]: money changes hands in india through this tax system and uh tax officers and all that so
[Guest]: I really think that that was not a good policy move. Uh, you know in terms of uh, yeah
[Guest]: I mean you want you want of course you want the government to provide uh public services good services
[Guest]: But then there should be evidence that that is being done. I don't think that is being done
[Amit Varma]: Right moving on. I mean as as we talk about uh, you know, all the different uh policies
[Amit Varma]: Of the modi government the one where i'm not going to spend much time though
[Amit Varma]: You've written very eloquently about it in your book is demonetization for the simple reason
[Amit Varma]: That i've had I think three episodes on demonetization
[Amit Varma]: That's fine, you know manmohan singh called it organized loot and legal plunder. Ajay shah called it macroeconomic trauma
[Amit Varma]: Macroeconomic trauma I described it at the time in a column for the times is the largest assault on property rights in human history
[Amit Varma]: It's just such a disaster that I don't even think there is a need for sensible people
[Amit Varma]: You know
[Unknown]: Have to be convinced
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so we'll kind of pass uh over demon but now, you know, the gst is very interesting because you know
[Amit Varma]: Demon was just a bad idea period but gst is actually a very good idea, which was badly implemented
[Amit Varma]: In fact, yashwant sinha once referred to the implementation of it as a potential harvard case study for what not to do
[Unknown]: and
[Amit Varma]: You know as you've quoted him in your book, which is where I get it from
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about what went wrong with gst and and my sort of uh follow-up question to that also is
[Amit Varma]: that uh
[Amit Varma]: even if you like a lot of the things that went wrong were due to political imperatives because different states were saying no put this
[Amit Varma]: Rate and put that rate on this and this rate on that and you had interest groups in the picture
[Amit Varma]: So if the gst is to be fixed like let's say if the congress comes to power inshallah and the gst is to be fixed
[Amit Varma]: Will the political imperatives allow that to happen?
[Guest]: well
[Guest]: first a broad philosophical point on gst or indirect taxes, I think
[Guest]: We've taken the easy way out on tax policy and the easy way out is just impose an indirect tax and
[Guest]: Then everybody gets to pay but you know you and I know from economic theory that this is
[Guest]: uh, these are regressive taxes and I think we are
[Guest]: The share of indirect taxes has been growing even if it was growing earlier as well. It's now
[Guest]: Well past 50 percent. We're really putting an undue burden on
[Guest]: Poorer sections and lower income sections and I think we must reverse course on
[Guest]: indirect taxation
[Guest]: Or at least we should you know as a share of tax revenues. I think direct taxes should be higher and
[Guest]: The interesting thing is that very few people in india talk about it and I don't know why
[Guest]: But be that as it may the gst
[Guest]: again, it goes to
[Guest]: Look at the state the state
[Guest]: Has very limited capacity and then you're asking the state to implement a tax system
[Guest]: That is inherently very complicated because of all the different rate structures you have
[Guest]: Additional kind of cessus and other things and what is this and what is that?
[Guest]: What rate do you apply here? You've got to you know, keep things a little simple and
[Guest]: They they called it the good and simple tax, but it wasn't it was anything but good and simple. So
[Guest]: The other thing is that I don't think enough homework was done
[Guest]: In terms of how other countries have I think we refuse to learn from other countries. I just
[Guest]: It's almost as if we know everything we don't know everything
[Guest]: Malaysia by the way had been trying to implement this thing and their gst they prepared their I think there was a
[Guest]: preparation time of about
[Guest]: 18 months maybe longer, you know from the time they took the decision here
[Guest]: We're just kind of here that I think they spent more time on kind of figuring out how to do a midnight
[Guest]: parliamentary session
[Guest]: To roll this out then they didn't try to figure out whether the technology backbone would really work
[Guest]: You know, there's there's a wealth of information on on these kinds of
[Guest]: Taxes around from around the world. Look at what the experience has been but we spend much more time
[Guest]: Debating whether we should have it or not have it and far too little time to discuss how it would be done
[Guest]: What would make sense and it was almost as if
[Guest]: Just do gst and you'll have a two percentage point increase in your gdp growth
[Guest]: Honestly, I think many of the somebody would talk about golden goldman sachs doing a report and
[Guest]: Saying that this would be a bump
[Guest]: Of this much to growth and all that. I think people were far more enamored of that
[Guest]: Oh gst is going to come and suddenly everything's going to be okay
[Guest]: I think this for for the next government of our future governments
[Guest]: The lesson is you know, the pretty much whatever you do
[Guest]: Things are not going to pan out the way you had hoped for now. The thing is what
[Guest]: Exactly should you be doing in advance to plan and you know, see the kinks
[Guest]: But actually we should have already kind of seen what happened if you think about demonetization
[Guest]: I don't want to go back to that details or that
[Guest]: Uh, uh crazy policy, but how they implemented even that they implemented that bad idea
[Guest]: Terrible idea in a terrible way kept coming up with new notifications and changes. They did the same for gst
[Guest]: Of course in gst now you have this council and everybody says oh
[Guest]: This pet food of mine should be exempted that that thing should not be exempted
[Guest]: So this is a crazy kind of uh crazy tax in a very kind of uh
[Guest]: To be implemented by a disorganized bureaucracy with a low implementation capacity
[Guest]: And what can go wrong? Everything can go wrong. And that is what happened
[Guest]: This acted as yet one, you know, one big huge speed bump for the economy
[Guest]: I don't think we can come out of this anytime soon if it continues this way. I'm not
[Guest]: Confident that this is going to increase. Uh, I don't think this is going to be good for the country
[Guest]: Frankly if they continue with this structure
[Guest]: Uh, this is a crazy structure. It needs to be disbanded or abandoned
[Guest]: Uh, by the way, some other countries did abandon the gst as a whole forget
[Guest]: Uh reforming it. They just abandoned it
[Guest]: It's a very you know, you have a country that is so diverse and then suddenly you're trying to you know
[Guest]: Reform the system and you try to do it in one fell swoop
[Guest]: And without any planning without any proper planning preparation, you'll have a disaster. That's what happened
[Amit Varma]: One of the areas in which people had a lot of hopes of the modi government was privatization
[Amit Varma]: You heard a lot about how we have so many psus and people would do draw graphs of okay
[Amit Varma]: Here's how the number of psu ppsus have increased through the decades and they've actually increased even more
[Amit Varma]: And you know my good friend sadhanand dhume you've quoted him in your book
[Amit Varma]: Summing it all up and i'll quote him as well
[Amit Varma]: Start quote in effect india's privatization program has become a dodgy accounting exercise in which one government owned entity buys stakes in another
[Amit Varma]: Rather than an attempt to streamline the economy by selling unproductive assets to private bidders
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote and this is really so bizarre because at least in privatization one assumed that there were a lot of low-hanging fruit
[Amit Varma]: That they could just get rid of and they did absolutely nothing
[Guest]: well
[Guest]: yeah, and and uh again i'm puzzled because uh, I don't understand you know, if
[Guest]: Prime minister modi
[Guest]: Uh in his first year had made the case
[Guest]: Imagine prime minister modi when he became prime minister, uh at the peak of his popularity said to the country
[Guest]: Look, the congress left me a terrible
[Guest]: uh problem with banks
[Guest]: And I need to do something drastic
[Guest]: And I need to fix this system
[Guest]: It'll mean taxpayer money will going to be used for whatever and but I had to do it
[Guest]: It's not my fault, but I have to rescue this country. I have to rescue that's what i'm here for
[Guest]: I don't think people would have blamed it. I think people would have been happy
[Guest]: I mean they would have at least given him a chance in a similar vein if he had said
[Guest]: You know what air india has been bleeding money for a long time. This is not a viable way to do business
[Guest]: It doesn't seem to be working
[Guest]: I have said myself that we we've been to kind of uh, reform some of these things
[Guest]: We're going to sell this thing off. I don't think people would have said
[Guest]: Modi you're wrong. They would have you know said okay, you know, he came to reform things and he's reforming reforming things
[Guest]: But as I write in the book people did not believe that he was a reformer of that sort
[Guest]: In fact, I don't think he believes in a smaller public sector, you know
[Guest]: I believe in a more efficient public sector. I believe in a more
[Guest]: Constrained public sector because I want the government to focus on things that the private sector is not able to deliver properly
[Guest]: The private sector cannot deliver your national defense the private private sector will not to my mind
[Guest]: Do a good job with you know, say
[Guest]: Police forces or justice and all the stuff, right?
[Guest]: I don't think he believes that I think he's just
[Guest]: He thinks that government can do everything and his government can do everything
[Guest]: So maybe I should not be puzzled after all these years. I think that's who he is
[Guest]: I don't think you know and by the way, that's what maybe most politicians in india think that we should have these kinds of
[Guest]: Things in air india is great and you know, we should have a flag carrier and all this stuff. I don't know
[Guest]: I think people may think like that. I personally do not believe that taxpayer money
[Guest]: Should be spent when there is no hope of you know, recovery in some of these enterprises
[Guest]: Now there are some things where you really need big public sector kind of giants to kind of
[Guest]: Do certain types of businesses they can be strategic in nature other countries have them too and they do they seem to do well
[Guest]: They some of them are doing well in india as well
[Guest]: But I can't make that case for most of them. I think so if I can't make that case for most of them
[Guest]: You know, you know what my feeling would be about disinvestment
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean I I often make the case that what india needs is a strong and limited government that does a few things
[Amit Varma]: Very well instead of a large and diffuse government that does nothing well
[Amit Varma]: I mean we effectively don't have a rule of law in most of the country
[Amit Varma]: You know, I I did an episode recently with puja mara who's also written a book about by the same publisher the last decade
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, uh, she talks about the
[Amit Varma]: Modi years and the and the point that she kind of makes was that it was political imperatives that caused him number one to move
[Amit Varma]: Away from reforms because many of these reforms were complicated thing around which you couldn't build a simple narrative
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, why bother if there's no short-term political payoff and at the same time which drew him towards
[Amit Varma]: Disasters like demonetization for example, not because of what impact it would have which he didn't give a damn about but because of how it could
[Amit Varma]: Be packaged as something that is anti-black money and will help the poor and so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: And how far do you think modi was driven purely by political imperatives and and you know that
[Amit Varma]: Was responsible for what has happened?
[Guest]: I think uh, modi is nothing if he's not a political animal. I think uh,
[Guest]: Clearly, uh politics plays a large role in
[Guest]: The decisions he's taken. I think in that sense puja is right, you know
[Guest]: Politics did drive say demonetization because it was packaged as a hit against black money and all that
[Guest]: Then you know the question is
[Guest]: then
[Guest]: Basically, we were all kind of
[Guest]: Hoping for something that would never happen because if a person like that who by all accounts is you know
[Guest]: Liked for his oratory and all that and can convince people to go with him pretty much
[Guest]: Very often or at least used to be if that person is not going to kind of
[Guest]: Level with the country and say look this makes sense to me
[Guest]: We are wasting
[Guest]: the hardened
[Guest]: Taxpayer money on things that we should not be spending on
[Guest]: Then in that sense, we never really want us, you know, we should then be
[Guest]: Careful about what we uh think of in the future. We should basically be hoping for coalition governments, honestly
[Guest]: Because we don't really need a strong central character because a strong central character
[Guest]: Can be much more destructive for india
[Guest]: With the weight for this benign dictator
[Guest]: Can take a lifetime and who knows how that will pan out and these things don't pan out
[Guest]: Well now in modi's case, I really thought that he might make some decisions which
[Guest]: I mean what what is tough about you know, telling the country that you know
[Guest]: The upa gave me a bad deal on banks and I need to fix it. Otherwise, you will not have jobs
[Guest]: That's a pretty simple argument to make I think people would have believed it
[Guest]: It was just that he was not focused on that. I think he was focused on
[Guest]: Administrative efficiency and how projects that were stalled would move forward. I think he was thinking small
[Guest]: He was not thinking big. He was really I think he was thinking very small
[Guest]: So somebody must have told him that you know, if we have a higher tax, people are not paying taxes
[Guest]: We need to increase the tax revenues
[Guest]: So yeah, okay, you know, let's let's go after that. But that's thinking small. That's not thinking broad
[Guest]: That's not thinking big. So I don't know maybe he's uh,
[Guest]: He's a victim of uh his own kind of
[Guest]: Ambitions in terms of in policy. Maybe he's a small, you know, he has a narrow base to think on
[Guest]: I think that's the only explanation I can come up with. I I don't really know
[Guest]: Why he did not make even the simplest no, it's some easy decisions. I don't know. I don't get it
[Guest]: I'm honestly i'm puzzled right, you know, and i'm just thinking aloud here
[Amit Varma]: It's something that a friend of mine who was very close to modi once upon a time in his gujarati years once told me
[Amit Varma]: And she mentioned how there was a social gathering at his house and he started to
[Amit Varma]: Telling a story at one point about how when he was a kid his mother was very ill
[Amit Varma]: And he was a boy then and he went to switch on the fan
[Amit Varma]: And when he flicked the switch he realized that there was no electricity
[Amit Varma]: And then he decided that if there's one thing I can do i'll focus on electricity
[Amit Varma]: And therefore when he becomes cm of gujarat, you know, he focuses on electrification and all my friends point in telling me
[Amit Varma]: The story basically was that his view of the world is very experiential
[Amit Varma]: If he has experienced something directly then he gives it importance like the lack of electricity
[Amit Varma]: Or roads or so on those physical things where he can see with his own eyes that yes, this makes a difference
[Amit Varma]: But for a man who doesn't apparently read too many books either when it comes to higher abstract concepts
[Amit Varma]: Which you need to grasp when you talk about how an economy functions
[Amit Varma]: Especially when so many of the fundamental economic truths you and I know like
[Amit Varma]: You know like all trade being positive some instead of zero some or spontaneous order the way markets organize themselves
[Amit Varma]: All of these higher level concepts is not something he would ever have grasped
[Amit Varma]: Because he hasn't experienced it directly and he has no way of doing so
[Amit Varma]: And and for this reason I sometimes call him the akhodeki prime minister and again i'm just speculating here
[Amit Varma]: Do you think there is something to this that he has no way of doing so?
[Amit Varma]: And again, i'm just speculating here. Do you think there is something to this that I mean in the sense that a politician
[Amit Varma]: Therefore also needs to be well read and well versed in abstract ideas. So you get a better sense of all of this
[Guest]: Uh, you know, you can't wing economic development, you know, this is uh, this is far too complex
[Guest]: I mean anybody who who basically decides to do demonetization
[Guest]: Has clearly not spent much time thinking about policies and their implications
[Guest]: You know, I think you're right. You may find it easier to say look
[Guest]: There's open defecation. I'm going to build more toilets
[Guest]: We need more girls education because that's what i've been told is, you know, we need more girls education where i'm studying or
[Guest]: There's no busily here and I would need to kind of flick a switch and so that there's power
[Guest]: I think yes, but uh
[Guest]: In today's world policy making is so complex. There's so much going on
[Guest]: There are so many you press one button and something else goes wrong and then you're trying to control for that and you can't control
[Guest]: for that and
[Guest]: You know, not everything is in your own kind of hands. You will have quantitative easing in the u.s
[Guest]: That'll have an impact on your currency
[Guest]: Uh, you that'll have an impact on flows of capital
[Guest]: So you need obviously no single person
[Guest]: Would have all that experience clearly
[Guest]: uh
[Guest]: But you should have some basic
[Guest]: Uh humility to know that you don't know everything
[Guest]: That's one second that you build a team or you have a team of people advisors and all that who can kind of
[Guest]: Give you different perspectives
[Guest]: You must listen. You should be a good listener
[Guest]: I think and you should be willing to take advice and you should be willing to say, you know what i'm wrong. This is not
[Guest]: I thought of it in the incorrect way. This expertise is really
[Guest]: Uh useful here, but I don't think you know from what I gather. I don't think people are that keen to give him advice
[Guest]: Because maybe they're scared of giving him advice
[Guest]: Or maybe he doesn't listen to advice who knows?
[Guest]: I mean if you can do demonetization without taking the rbi or your finance minister into confidence, which is alleged
[Guest]: Then then you know that we're in trouble, right? I mean
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: Yeah, you may be right about this experiential kind of uh instinct
[Guest]: But you know making policy based on that because those are things that you can do you can deliver
[Guest]: but in terms of if you cannot
[Guest]: In economic development in in governance in policy making you have to have a broad-based team
[Guest]: Uh who can actually help inform you who can help educate you and you know, that would be anybody
[Guest]: It's not just you know tomorrow. I mean you could be the prime minister of the country, but even you would need tons of
[Guest]: You know support no matter how broad-based your economic training has been so I think in that sense he too
[Guest]: You know, I think needs a lot of help. I'm not sure he thinks he needs it, but I I do think he needs it
[Amit Varma]: I mean, yeah, as I said earlier
[Amit Varma]: I think the most important quality for anybody in a position of power is epistemic humility
[Amit Varma]: And and that's something that we've kind of consistently lacked you've you know
[Amit Varma]: So you've got a couple of great chapters on what the policies and programs of the government were and what the results were and i'll just
[Amit Varma]: Encourage all my listeners to um buy the book and read that there's some great
[Amit Varma]: Detail in there. I want to sort of stick to broader questions
[Amit Varma]: One of which being what did he get right in that time? I know that's a hard question
[Guest]: No, no, I mean, you know
[Guest]: To my mind some of the things that I think he deserves a good credit for is something like bringing attention
[Guest]: to you know
[Guest]: Clean india right swachh bharat. I think that kind of personal attention and relentless attention
[Guest]: I think that's a kind of a national level kind of even I mean forget what happens on the ground and all this
[Guest]: just creating awareness, I think
[Guest]: Leaders should be creating awareness about issues of national importance
[Guest]: Uh, you know educating the girl child
[Guest]: These kinds of things are I think these are things that are aspirational in some ways for a country like india
[Guest]: And it's good to kind of you know for leaders to kind of wear their
[Guest]: Kind of thoughts on their sleeves in some ways and say look this is important to me
[Guest]: I really want and especially if you're a popular leader and you
[Guest]: Use your popularity to kind of bring awareness because a lot of the times we're simply not aware
[Guest]: Despite all the smartphones and technology and everything
[Guest]: Most people you know, we just we get used to seeing things from our own perspective. We never kind of
[Guest]: It's hard for us to kind of you know
[Guest]: Look at things from a broader perspective and having a leader like that talk about these kinds of issues
[Guest]: I think is very very important and I think it's very helpful
[Guest]: So I would say on these kinds of issues. I have kind of in my book also going to said that yes
[Guest]: He's talked a good game and he's kind of uh led on these and I think he should get credit for these kinds of things
[Guest]: um
[Guest]: You know coming up with these indices for cities
[Guest]: Which one is clean which is not, you know may not pay immediate dividends
[Guest]: But ultimately may prove that there's some competition and you know, maybe it may help cities to kind of you know
[Guest]: Take pride in the work that they're doing in terms of keeping the cities clean
[Guest]: Creating a more welcoming kind of environment for people
[Guest]: Um, he's talked a good game on tourism and but you know, uh in terms of you know
[Guest]: Ease of visas and all that stuff making india feel more welcome
[Guest]: But you know, of course the other the flip side is that we need to do a lot more on
[Guest]: Safety, I think that has fallen by the wayside because you know, we need uh, we our police is still a force not a service
[Guest]: And I think there I think that it's both a positive in terms of trying to create a better image for india
[Guest]: But at the same time not doing the basics that are needed. So you
[Guest]: You know that that's the kind of I sometimes get frustrated why this whole good talk
[Guest]: Aspirational talk and then under delivery of the basics. I think that's where I feel
[Guest]: A little bit of frustration with the government
[Guest]: But there are other things too, you know, they did finally push through ibc
[Guest]: Yes, they did the gst. Of course the gst is a mess
[Guest]: But at least uh, you know
[Guest]: He was able to push it through now
[Guest]: We'll have to kind of you know
[Guest]: Now we have it in the constitutional framework and now we can kind of maybe
[Guest]: Do wholesale reform not once and for all but at least in a major way. I think ibc happened a bit
[Guest]: Late in my view, but even then I think ibc is now hampered. Uh, I mean, you know the bankruptcy code
[Guest]: I don't know if how well that is being implemented right now
[Guest]: I don't know but at least you know he moved on that ease of doing business. I think
[Guest]: Frankly, they're trying to game the system
[Guest]: Genuinely ease of doing business would be when everybody
[Guest]: Around the country would feel that yes, it's easier to do business. I don't think that's happening. I think because
[Guest]: There's more coercion these days i'm told on businesses than used to be the case
[Guest]: So even though the world bank has recognized india
[Guest]: As having done a lot on ease of doing business. I think that may be more
[Guest]: Through gaming the system, you know putin once told his officials that he wanted russia to be
[Guest]: In the top 30 by a certain number of years
[Guest]: And I think they're all scurrying to figure out how they would do it within the stipulated time and they did it
[Guest]: So, you know when you have the threat of putin, uh, hanging over your head
[Guest]: You can you can do that and I think in modi's case too
[Guest]: They managed to gain this
[Guest]: I think managed to gain the system a little bit
[Guest]: But honestly, I don't think there's a lot that i'm happy about. I really think this is a missed opportunity
[Guest]: really missed opportunity
[Guest]: And uh people like you and I will be okay
[Guest]: But people who could have benefited disproportionately, I think they're not going to be okay
[Amit Varma]: So before I ask you about you know, the state of the economy today just a tangential thought
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously you're right about uh, you know when I saw the eodb, uh, the things I figured that yeah
[Amit Varma]: Wherever there are metrics, they can be gamed
[Amit Varma]: So this is like an evolving game where you have to keep taking the metrics deeper and deeper
[Amit Varma]: But so here's a tangential question because you mentioned the ibc the bankruptcy code
[Amit Varma]: That where it's apparently at is that while the ibc is not in the market
[Amit Varma]: But where it's apparently at is that while the ibc is a welcome
[Amit Varma]: Uh reform where we are stuck is that state capacity simply isn't enough
[Amit Varma]: So now now because of state capacity not being enough you're kind of stuck now
[Amit Varma]: You're someone who could hopefully, you know, maybe be in government one day and in a position to carry out reforms
[Amit Varma]: When you are in that position besides the immediate considerations of the political economy
[Amit Varma]: Do you also have to take into account whether there is enough state capacity for those reforms to happen at all?
[Guest]: Oh, yeah. Yeah, absolutely. I I I mentioned it earlier in this
[Guest]: We've limited capacity, you know, we we talk about our civil service officers and how hard they're working and all this stuff
[Guest]: But for the most part in government, and by the way, when we talk about government, we're not talking about just the central government
[Guest]: We're talking about state governments as well. The public sector is very limited capacity
[Guest]: So, uh when you try to implement things it takes so much more effort so much more time, you know, I was just recently
[Guest]: visited
[Guest]: um the Hoover Dam
[Guest]: in Nevada in the US
[Guest]: Nevada slash Arizona
[Guest]: the Hoover Dam in was uh built from 1931 to 1935
[Guest]: In you know, just around the time of the depression
[Guest]: in five years roughly
[Guest]: There's a flyover and Hoover Dam is huge
[Guest]: There's a flyover in Hyderpore of Srinagar
[Guest]: Which was built over seven years the length of the flyover is maybe about a kilometer less than that
[Guest]: It's not even a flyover. It's a kind of an overpass
[Guest]: Hoover Dam five to six years and this flyover
[Guest]: Seven years a small little thing
[Guest]: This flyover was built in the 2000s
[Guest]: Now imagine where we are look at the difference now
[Guest]: You can't say that we we didn't have resources because we clearly had resources because we built the flyover
[Guest]: But how is it possible that in a modern state?
[Guest]: It takes seven years to build a one kilometer long flyover in Srinagar
[Guest]: Whereas somebody built a huge dam
[Guest]: major irrigation project
[Guest]: major power generation project
[Guest]: in the 1930s
[Guest]: I think we need to recognize that we are still limited
[Guest]: And in some ways when you craft policies, you have to keep that in mind
[Guest]: If you don't keep that in mind, you'll have implementation disaster after implementation disaster
[Guest]: And and that is why I think I'm at your point of doing a few things really well
[Guest]: I think that's important
[Guest]: Let's just do a few things, but let's let the government do them really well
[Guest]: Let there be a contract between we call it the social contract in some ways between
[Guest]: The citizen and the state and say you know what you want to do schools. You want to do education public education?
[Guest]: Yeah, okay, but we want you to deliver along these parameters
[Guest]: These are the indicators of success. These are the learning outcomes we want. This is how we want our children to grow
[Guest]: If we could have that
[Guest]: I mean, I refer to the PISA kind of system of
[Guest]: Testing across countries as far as education attainment is concerned
[Guest]: I think the last time it was done under the UPA government
[Guest]: Then we abandoned it because our kids from I think Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh
[Guest]: Which was supposed to be the better states at that time participated and turned out
[Guest]: we performed worse than
[Guest]: Students in Kyrgyzstan and I think after that the government said no we're not going to do this anymore
[Guest]: As in stop participating now, they're going to restart that participation
[Guest]: But what that tells me is that we are we if we're going to do education, let's do it
[Guest]: Well, let's focus on that. Let's focus on fewer things. Let's not focus on everything and that's the problem
[Guest]: I think and by the way, this is not Modi's creation. I'm not can't blame Modi for this. This has been going on for
[Guest]: one government after another
[Guest]: but we now need a situation where we can actually, you know, if
[Guest]: If we're serious about the country's progress if you're serious about our young people if you're serious about creating opportunities for them
[Guest]: Then you know, we have to take some tough decisions
[Amit Varma]: Right. So I I want to move beyond economics and beyond your book right now
[Amit Varma]: Your book is really about uh, Modi's being a great disappointment or a great betrayal as Raghav would say in terms of economics
[Amit Varma]: but I want to go beyond that for a moment and ask you about Kashmir because it seems pretty evident to me that
[Amit Varma]: A lot of things have gone wrong there in the last five years and in fact were going wrong for from even much before that
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about what's happening
[Guest]: well
[Guest]: you know, actually
[Guest]: During Prime Minister Malishpa's time and then even Dr. Manmohan Singh's time, I think there was a semblance of return to
[Guest]: Some level of normalcy things had eased off, you know, there's a greater participation in kind of, you know
[Guest]: Elections and all that just because people felt that thing it was safer
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: the rich of the militants had kind of
[Guest]: You know had subsided. I mean all of their power had subsided
[Guest]: then in
[Guest]: 2013-14
[Guest]: Militancy we started hearing the militancy was beginning to pick up a little bit more. This was in the aftermath of the Abdul Guru hanging
[Guest]: But it was still very limited. The estimates would be 100 or 200 people and all that stuff and
[Guest]: That's it killings had come down
[Guest]: civilian or soldiers
[Guest]: Fewer people were dying. But I think when the 2014 election came up
[Guest]: And the verdict was pretty lopsided, you know
[Guest]: The People's Democratic Party led by Mufti Syed at that time
[Guest]: Won heavily in Kashmir the BJP won heavily in Jammu. In fact, the Congress did not have a single
[Guest]: MLA from the Hindu regions of Jammu, which was pretty astonishing
[Guest]: It was a total kind of polarized verdict
[Guest]: And of course the government, you know came up and the BJP and the PDP at that time formed the government that created
[Guest]: I think a lot of disquiet in Kashmir and it was almost like oh now the BJP is going to rule us
[Guest]: The same BJP that the PDP had vilified and fought against during the assembly election
[Guest]: So I think the space for political discourse actually shrank
[Guest]: So again, there was polarization in that sense that militancy started creeping up and
[Guest]: If you remember in the last four or five years a rhetoric on television
[Guest]: And obviously political rhetoric has been pretty much about
[Guest]: Kashmiris as terrorists, Kashmiris as terrorist lovers, this thing, that thing
[Guest]: I think it was this vilification campaign that kind of put Kashmiris in a corner
[Guest]: So in some ways it was like I'm not surprised that there's so much anger and resentment in Kashmir now
[Guest]: There's more violence now
[Guest]: And because I think Kashmir suits BJP's politics greatly personally. This is what I think, you know
[Guest]: The Congress party has always had this philosophy that in J&K
[Guest]: The Congress party should not try to kind of bring in its central dominating kind of politics
[Guest]: Because regional parties are better able to kind of deal with regional aspirations
[Guest]: And it's a very, I think it's a very deliberate kind of thing
[Guest]: As far as the BJP is concerned, the BJP views Kashmir as a lever for national politics
[Guest]: It's the exact opposite of how the Congress sees J&K
[Guest]: So I'm not at all surprised by how things have deteriorated in Kashmir
[Guest]: And they have, you know, more people. I mean, I think everybody's kind of seen the numbers now
[Guest]: More soldiers died in 2018 than in any year since 2008
[Guest]: So more civilians dying
[Guest]: There's no end to this conflict, you know, and it's been going on for 30 years
[Guest]: I think the best hope was when Prime Minister Vajpayee was in control
[Guest]: And then also to some extent where the Musharraf was bouncing, you know, that formula
[Guest]: But then everything since then has kind of, you know, petered out, things have gotten worse
[Guest]: And so I don't know. I mean, I think BJP has to be very careful
[Guest]: In not making everything political
[Guest]: National interests cannot be, you know, in some ways I feel that BJP doesn't think of
[Guest]: It places the party political interest above the national interest as far as Kashmir is concerned
[Guest]: And by the way, for that, I think it may be that BJP does not view the national interest
[Guest]: The same way the rest of us do, because maybe they think that the state of the nation right now
[Guest]: This is not the nation that we want to be
[Guest]: They want a different type of nation. So, you know, if you don't think that this is the kind of nation you wanted
[Guest]: Then you can place political interest above what we consider the national interest
[Guest]: Because you're trying to get to a different nation state and different national interest
[Guest]: So in that sense, it makes sense from their political perspective
[Guest]: It makes sense. Maybe they want a different India and Kashmir suits that purpose
[Guest]: And also in the popular rhetoric these days party is equal to nation in their rhetoric
[Amit Varma]: So if you're anti-BJP, you're automatically considered anti-national
[Amit Varma]: So Salman, now that I've got you on the show, I also have to ask you questions about the Congress
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is for a democracy to be healthy, you need a healthy opposition
[Amit Varma]: And the decline of the Congress is something that has, you know, I mean, I used to write against the Congress all the time
[Amit Varma]: When they were in power and now, of course, I write against the BJP all the time because they're in power
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things that has happened is in 2016, you know, the Congress has been in power
[Amit Varma]: And in 2014, Congress declined massively to 44 seats and the health of the party is something that is called in concern
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that dismays many of us about it is that unlike the BJP
[Amit Varma]: That doesn't really seem to be an active grassroots and a cadre from which leaders spontaneously emerge
[Amit Varma]: What you instead have is a continuation of a series of dynasties
[Amit Varma]: Like I look across the party today, even apart from Rahul Gandhi, you have Shindia and Pilate
[Amit Varma]: And if I may say so, even yourself, you know, who are part of dynasties
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, Rahul Gandhi himself used to talk about inner party democracy once upon a time
[Amit Varma]: But we don't see that and even if it was there, where are the cadres? Where are the grassroots?
[Guest]: Okay, so these are actually two different questions because first, let's talk about the dynasty part
[Guest]: And you're right, my father, like I said earlier, has been a politician for a long time
[Guest]: And to be totally transparent, of course, when I joined politics, you know, I got immediate recognition
[Guest]: Because of my father, right? Because they knew who he was
[Guest]: Now in politics, you know, you really have to prove yourself
[Guest]: And ultimately, people will, you may make it to a certain point and say, okay, you know
[Guest]: I'm going to compete for this particular seat or whatever
[Guest]: But ultimately, it's the people who decide whether you're the right person for them or not
[Guest]: So I think in that sense, this dynasty part is not specific to Congress
[Guest]: I mean, of course, you see similar things in other political parties as well
[Guest]: And in other countries as well
[Guest]: What matters is whether or not whoever is in politics, at least to my mind, are they delivering for the people?
[Guest]: If they're not, they'll be, you know, you can't really, you can't keep them
[Guest]: As in, you know, people, it is up to the people ultimately to whether or not they keep them or not
[Guest]: Of course, and by the way, this isn't going to go away
[Guest]: Just because we may feel a certain way about it
[Guest]: Because it's, you know, this has been happening historically
[Guest]: It's going to continue happening in India and elsewhere
[Guest]: So that's the one part about dynasty
[Guest]: Yes, do we have other leaders who are coming in who are not related to politicians?
[Guest]: Of course, I mean, I'm sure that, you know, we tend to focus on dynasties
[Guest]: Because they're easy to kind of comprehend
[Guest]: They're easy to calculate
[Guest]: But there's so many people that I know of in our party, in other parties
[Guest]: Who have nothing to do with politics
[Guest]: They're first-time politicians and they're doing extremely well
[Guest]: So on the dynasty part, frankly, I don't really see it as something that is inherently bad
[Guest]: Unless you feel that dynasties can be sustained without people's support
[Guest]: Ultimately, people will have to weigh in in a democracy
[Guest]: And when they do, sometimes you win, sometimes you lose
[Guest]: Depends on how well you've done
[Guest]: I lost an election myself
[Guest]: My first election, I lost myself despite the fact that, you know
[Guest]: I felt that I was a good candidate
[Guest]: I'd gone to the World Bank
[Guest]: I had a lot of policy experience
[Guest]: Had no scandals per se
[Guest]: I was well-meaning
[Guest]: But, you know, people saw it different
[Guest]: People felt that a different candidate was better for them
[Guest]: Because maybe he came from their part of the world or whatever
[Guest]: So democracy has that equalizing effect, I think
[Guest]: As far as the carders and where are the carders, what's happening
[Guest]: Why isn't the Congress, you know, people say
[Guest]: The RSS is everywhere
[Guest]: Where is the Congress party?
[Guest]: You know, there is this thing about, to my mind, about liberal politics everywhere
[Guest]: That it seems that when it comes to being on the ground
[Guest]: They seem to be less kind of active than, say, people who are on the far right
[Guest]: I don't know why that is the case
[Guest]: I mean, I hear about similar complaints in the US, in Europe
[Guest]: That is, you know, the carder-based political parties
[Guest]: Which are typically left of center
[Guest]: They don't seem to be as active as the far right
[Guest]: Now, it has been my experience
[Guest]: That even if you don't see the kind of same visible RSS ground game
[Guest]: I've seen in my own experience, Congress supporters are in the unlikeliest of places
[Guest]: In Kashmir, I can't tell you, there are these
[Guest]: I bet so many people who support Congress
[Guest]: And for no, I mean, and it kind of really puzzled me
[Guest]: I was like, you guys never, you know, PDP and NC always win here
[Guest]: How are you still with the Congress?
[Guest]: Very different reasons
[Guest]: But they're still there
[Guest]: So I think in this particular election, we're going to see a different kind of outcome, I think
[Guest]: And that outcome is not possible if you don't have feet on the ground
[Guest]: But we need to pay a lot more attention to this
[Guest]: I think now, politics is changing
[Guest]: The threat from the far right is far too significant
[Guest]: It cannot be kind of, it cannot be disregarded
[Guest]: I think time has come for political parties to be more active
[Guest]: Political parties like the Congress to pay a lot more attention to organization
[Guest]: And mobilizing resources
[Guest]: But, you know, we are in a difficult situation right now
[Guest]: Because we have limited resources
[Guest]: And we are fighting this election
[Guest]: And it's not that easy
[Guest]: But let's see what the outcome is
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, if I may speculate, I mean, on the one hand, it's
[Amit Varma]: If I may say so, the Congress in recent years has seemed to be a party
[Amit Varma]: Which just wants to come to power, doesn't really believe in anything
[Amit Varma]: What are really the core beliefs, if I may take a skeptic's view
[Amit Varma]: But if I, you know, on the other hand, to be a two-handed economist
[Amit Varma]: If I, you know, one reason if I may speculate
[Amit Varma]: Why liberal parties have less of an impact at the grassroots
[Amit Varma]: And far right parties do is that because hate is a bigger motivating factor than hope is
[Amit Varma]: You know, hope can become very diffused
[Amit Varma]: And there is a free rider effect and all of those things
[Amit Varma]: Whereas, you know, the more you whip up hate, the better the turnout you're going to get
[Amit Varma]: Which is, you know, really worrying
[Amit Varma]: You know, I have another question
[Amit Varma]: You guys just released your manifesto
[Amit Varma]: And my other question sort of goes back to the BJP manifesto of 2014
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote from your book
[Amit Varma]: Quote, the manifesto accused the UPA of not maintaining that growth
[Amit Varma]: And leaving the next government with sub 5% growth
[Amit Varma]: The BJP charged that the UPA pushed the country backwards by 20 years
[Amit Varma]: And that millions of men and women were jobless
[Amit Varma]: Arguing that the country had lost hope
[Amit Varma]: The BJP cast itself as a party that would act decisively
[Amit Varma]: To address the country's challenges on a priority basis
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote
[Amit Varma]: Now, what strikes me is that one, obviously, that their manifesto
[Amit Varma]: Had a lot of things in it which were good as you yourself said
[Amit Varma]: But the other thing is that this could
[Amit Varma]: This exact sentence could be used for today
[Amit Varma]: Just changing the UPA and the BJP
[Amit Varma]: Just switching them
[Amit Varma]: Where you have the Congress talking about how the BJP has done such a miserable job
[Amit Varma]: Over the last few years, which is absolutely true
[Amit Varma]: And equally promising drastic action
[Amit Varma]: Now, my question is, why should anyone take manifesto seriously?
[Amit Varma]: Because as we've seen, the BJP did not follow up on their manifesto of 2014
[Amit Varma]: And you know, if I can ask a specific question that struck me from your manifesto
[Amit Varma]: Like, there's lots in your manifesto to like
[Amit Varma]: For example, one of the promises you guys make is that
[Amit Varma]: Cities will be empowered and, you know, empowered mayors will be elected
[Amit Varma]: And therefore governance will be better
[Amit Varma]: But the question that struck me when I saw this was that
[Amit Varma]: Wait a minute, this is a state subject
[Amit Varma]: This is, you know, the national government has nothing to do with this at all
[Amit Varma]: The Congress is already in a power in a number of states
[Amit Varma]: And they could do this now if they wanted to
[Amit Varma]: So what is it in this manifesto for? Is it just posturing?
[Guest]: Well, I think it's not posturing per se
[Guest]: I think it is in some ways trying to draw a philosophical line
[Guest]: Because decentralization, like the one you talked about in terms of urban governance reforms
[Guest]: First, you know, urban governance reforms are needed, necessary
[Guest]: Without that, you can't really do much
[Guest]: At least you have to have a statement which says, look, this is important
[Guest]: And it is important, especially if India continues to urbanize
[Guest]: And by the way, I don't really believe the figure that India is 70% or 69% rural right now
[Guest]: I think a lot of what has happened is that the landscape has transformed
[Guest]: Cities and villages are getting fused together through other settlements
[Guest]: So I think India may be a bit more urbanized than we think it is
[Guest]: And for that, we need new governance systems
[Guest]: We do need decentralization
[Guest]: And in some ways, this is part of the Congress Party's core philosophy
[Guest]: Going back to the 73rd and 74th Amendment
[Guest]: Going back to what Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi had wanted to do through Panchayat Raj and all that
[Guest]: So I think the aspiration remains
[Guest]: I think the philosophical statement remains
[Guest]: I think what we have to do a far better job of is to actually implement the thing, right?
[Guest]: To persuade governments at the state levels to say, look, we have to do this
[Guest]: It is, you know, in some ways, you can't really dictate to state governments these days, obviously
[Guest]: I mean, unless you're a BJP and you control more than half the country
[Guest]: And maybe you can
[Guest]: And that would have made it easier
[Guest]: But, you know, in some ways, you have to persuade governments
[Guest]: And you had to kind of create models in other states and say, look, I mean, this is working really well here
[Guest]: People are benefiting here
[Guest]: Other states should follow suit
[Guest]: But it is not, you know, I do think that manifestos are serious documents
[Guest]: If you look at the BJP's manifesto, also, they try to follow up on a lot of different things
[Guest]: But I think what, you know, like electrification and this thing and that thing
[Guest]: But I think what BJP missed out on was the broader kind of policy reforms
[Guest]: So, in fact, if you look at all the promises, there's so many that they actually did try to follow up on
[Guest]: Whether that was the right thing or not, that's different
[Guest]: But they tried to follow up on a lot of things
[Guest]: The Congress Party, too, will, you know, this is one way to hold political parties accountable
[Guest]: But I do think that this particular Congress manifesto has some very important
[Guest]: Statements and that have to do with the role of the state
[Guest]: To my mind, I have not come across any Congress manifesto which actually says
[Guest]: That the private sector will lead through investment
[Guest]: And the public sector will focus on public goods
[Guest]: Or, you know, for the most part
[Guest]: I mean, that's a pretty interesting statement to make, right?
[Guest]: I mean, this is what people like me like
[Guest]: I'm sure, Amit, you also want something similar where the private sector is
[Guest]: At least in a statement, unleashed
[Guest]: And then the public sector is redefined for public goods
[Guest]: So, I think very important, very important
[Guest]: Also, our commitment to individual freedoms in this manifesto
[Guest]: I think that is very important
[Guest]: And I think part of it may be born out of our experience with the current government
[Guest]: And how this government has actually threatened a lot of our personal freedoms
[Guest]: So, maybe the next government that we hopefully have something to do with
[Guest]: Will kind of implement an agenda where we can strengthen these freedoms
[Guest]: So that whichever government comes in the future
[Guest]: At least will face the pressure from citizenry as well as institutions alike
[Guest]: So, I know there's a lot of cynicism
[Guest]: I know it's not misplaced
[Guest]: But at the same time, you know, we have to have some hope
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I've been writing from say the early 2000s
[Amit Varma]: About our free speech laws
[Amit Varma]: Not just the sedition law, which you guys have said you will abolish
[Amit Varma]: But also 295A, 153A, things you haven't mentioned
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the Congress after all was the party that banned the Satanic verses
[Amit Varma]: Which remains banned
[Amit Varma]: But I completely buy your point that it's important to change the rhetoric
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, that the commitment that you guys have explicitly made to individual rights
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the primacy of the private sector is great
[Amit Varma]: Let's see how much of that really happens
[Amit Varma]: I'll kind of...
[Amit Varma]: And regarding what you said about urban development
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, I agree with you
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode a few weeks back
[Amit Varma]: Which I'll link from the episode page with Ruben Abraham and Pritika Hingorani
[Amit Varma]: Of the IDFC Institute
[Amit Varma]: On how India is far more urban than we think
[Amit Varma]: And what we should do to smooth that process
[Amit Varma]: You know, I've taken a lot of your time
[Amit Varma]: Sort of a final question to end with
[Amit Varma]: Which is, again, I ask you to answer this not wearing your hat as a Congress spokesperson
[Amit Varma]: But as wearing your hat as an Indian citizen
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, much of the book is written with that hat, frankly, as I was surprised by
[Amit Varma]: But just wearing the hat of an Indian citizen
[Amit Varma]: If you look forward to, say, the next five years
[Amit Varma]: What gives you hope and what gives you despair?
[Guest]: Well, what gives me hope is that, frankly, we really need to change the rhetoric
[Guest]: Frankly, we've reached a bit of a crisis point as far as the economy is concerned
[Guest]: I think the inequality, the rising inequality
[Guest]: And the kind of lack of good, decent job creation
[Guest]: Along with this demographic kind of imperative
[Guest]: I think is creating a situation where we have no choice but to act
[Guest]: So remember how sometimes we act because there's a crisis
[Guest]: I think the crisis point is reached
[Guest]: And I think we have to do something
[Guest]: I mean, no matter what government comes, I think we have to do something drastic
[Guest]: Otherwise, we're in trouble
[Guest]: I think India is in trouble otherwise
[Guest]: So I think I'm hoping
[Guest]: The hope is that policymakers understand and realize that there is a serious situation in India
[Guest]: Especially on the employment front
[Guest]: And by the way, that is direct linkages to inequality
[Guest]: And that something has to be done
[Guest]: And so that gives me hope
[Guest]: Of course, what causes me concern is that
[Guest]: Policymakers may not get it
[Guest]: And like has happened in this government's term
[Guest]: That they may actually end up doing more harm than good
[Guest]: In fact, one of the principles
[Guest]: I actually talked about four principles of policymaking
[Guest]: And one of them is, you know, do no harm
[Guest]: I never thought I would have to write something like that
[Guest]: Do no harm as a principle of policymaking
[Guest]: But I think, you know, after the experience of this government
[Guest]: I'm, you know, I think it's sensible to include something like that
[Guest]: So yeah, so hope and caution are both linked to this moment in our history
[Guest]: And there are clear dangers ahead
[Guest]: There's a crisis
[Guest]: In my view, there's a crisis in the country
[Guest]: And it's only going to get worse, by the way
[Guest]: It's not going to improve if we don't do something
[Guest]: And that gives me hope that we may end up doing something
[Guest]: Because when it's this crisis time, when it's crunch time
[Guest]: Some of us step forward and do something about it
[Guest]: And that's what I hope from the next government
[Amit Varma]: Salman, thank you so much for coming on the scene in The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: I learnt a lot reading your book and talking to you
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much, Amir
[Guest]: Thank you so much for having me
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this show
[Amit Varma]: Hop on over to your nearest bookstore, online or otherwise
[Amit Varma]: And pick up a copy of The Great Disappointment by Salman Sos
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Salman on Twitter at Salman Sos
[Amit Varma]: S-A-L-M-A-N-S-O-Z, one word
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A
[Amit Varma]: The Scene in The Unseen is supported by the
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution and Independent Centre for Research and Education in Public Policy
[Amit Varma]: The Takshashila Institution offers 12-week courses in public policy, technology policy and strategic studies
[Amit Varma]: And for both full-time students and working professionals
[Amit Varma]: Admissions for the May 2019 batch are now open
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details
[Amit Varma]: You can browse all our past episodes at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening
[Unknown]: Filter coffee is a fascinating beverage
[Unknown]: You need to pick the right beans, blend them in the right proportion, roast them to perfection
[Unknown]: And slow brew at the right temperature to get the perfect cup
[Unknown]: Which is exactly like great conversations as well
[Unknown]: You need to track down the most interesting minds, get them into their zone
[Unknown]: And settle down for an unhurried, unscripted chat
[Unknown]: And coffee for me is always, always, always best enjoyed with friends
[Unknown]: I am Karthik Nagarajan and do share my table
[Unknown]: As I meet some of the most interesting people I know
[Unknown]: And sit them down for a strong cup of coffee and an even stronger conversation
[Unknown]: Join me every Wednesday for a freshly brewed episode
[Unknown]: This is not frappe, this is the Filter Coffee Podcast
[Unknown]: Hi, my name is Anupam Gupta, I'm B50 on Twitter
[Unknown]: I am the host of Pesa Pesa, a show that talks money
[Unknown]: On my show, I speak to experts from every field of money and finance
[Unknown]: From stock markets, equities, debt funds, credit cards, life insurance
[Unknown]: Every possible area of money and finance that you can think of
[Unknown]: We even did an episode on cryptocurrency
[Unknown]: I've got fantastic guests from mutual funds to personal finance
[Unknown]: Experts everywhere, robo-adventure startups, just name it, we've got it
[Unknown]: At Pesa Pesa, we help you make smart decisions about money
[Unknown]: You work hard for money, now make your money work hard for you
[Unknown]: New episodes out every Monday
[Unknown]: And you can listen to my show on the IVM Podcast app
[Unknown]: Or any other podcasting app that you have
[Unknown]: Pesa Pesa is brought to you by PTM Money